We were mentioned in a Askreddit thread on the front page
Here it is
Welcome, anyone new :)
When I was 12, I wanted to become a DJ
My mom knew, and she told my grandmother, who laughed in my face
Tomorrow night, I'm opening for Dada Life, a huge DJ duo touring worldwide.
Don't really know what I wanted to say out of this, just wanted to share it
Pretty sure my grandmother didn't mean it in a harmful way when she laughed, but I think she laughed at how absurd it would be for me to become a DJ
Regardless, tomorrow night I'm playing an hour long set right before Dada Life, and I'm so fucking excited.
The gig is at Pacha U18, a night club located in Manhattan, NYC, that has an under 18 event every month or so
They were asking around for DJs, and I sent them this message, January 7th
Superbowl Sunday, as I was on my way to my friend's house for a superbowl party, I get this text
From then, it was just info exchanges.
My soundcloud, after people asking, is DeanTheDJ
I have very old music on this, and it's not music that I'm proud of, haha
You can listen to some more recent work here, which is some music that I enjoyed making as well as working on.
I'll be posting pictures and stuff tomorrow when I get back (currently 12:50 PM on Saturday, gotta start getting ready son haha)
Thank you all for your support, I can't stress that enough, I'm scared shitless of messing up but you guys reassuring me has helped me so much &lt;3
After a while of some pretty cool music from some pretty cool DJs, I went to the basement (another set of DJs, very small crowd, if any) and greeted the DJ and made some chitchat for a while
Around 5:45 I went back to mainstage to get backstage, but there was a security guard that didn't let me go backstage
After explaining to him that I was on at 6 (currently 5:50), he still didn't budge
I asked him to radio my boss, but he said that my boss didn't carry a radio
Cue 5 minutes of endless frustration and texts to my boss (who rarely answers his texts, by the way)
At the last minute, I decide to just start walking around and looking for him
I found him downstairs in the basement just chatting away with some group of guys
He looked at me like "wtf, you're supposed to be playing any minute now" and I just asked him to take me backstage
He escorted me there, but as I walked in, the security guard gave me a dirty look because he realized I was right
It's currently 6:02 / 6:03, and the DJ from 5-6 is still playing, so there's no real worries
Once behind the DJ currently playing, I gave him a tap on the shoulder and told him that he can kill his set after his next song (I'm a nice guy, I guess) and I'll take over from then.
Long story short, I went on and played some kickass music and the crowd loved it
At around 7:25, some guy taps me on the shoulder, and when I turn around, it's just some dude in a suit who tells me to kill the music completely after the song that goes past 7:30 ends (meaning, when the clock hits 7:30, let the song playing continue and end completely, then get off stage)
I do exactly that, and when I turn around to get off stage (after grabbing my USBs from the turntables), I see Dada Life
Excited, I say hi and they thank me for my set and it's pretty much just a small exchange before they run to the stage
No huge meet and greet, didn't get to have a chat with them unfortunately, but it was still pretty cool to meet them
They offered me a banana though, which I thanked them for and accepted the kind offer, haha
I did get to enjoy their set too, but from the crowd (probably even better than being backstage)
The night ends, and the next day I text my boss to thank him for the gig, and if he ever needs another opener, to feel free to text me, lol.
So that's pretty much it, no cool pics of dada life unfortunately, but I do have some videos from the crowd, and if you guys want, I can go ahead and upload them all on youtube and link it here.
Thanks for reading this all, and I appreciate all the support you guys gave me, it definitely helped give me a confidence boost to rock that stage &lt;3
Let's try something a little different
(Serious)
But its like instead of looking forward to being a more grown person in the future I worry about what will be wrong with present me when I get to that future person
It's almost like I'm being watched.
I'm at my girlfriend's prom right now
I lost her and her friends didn't want me to hang out with them so I'm exploring the hotel like a secret agent.
Bored.
Final Edit: Doubt anyone is still reading this but we broke up :(
I just found out the subreddit /r/chicken came before the subreddit /r/egg.
r/chicken = 5 years r/egg = 4 years
Isn't that delightful

What delightful facts/observations about life/yourself/whatsgoingon can you share with me

Coffee noob here
Just had an embarrassing realization.
So I recently started college
Prior to the start of the semester, I had never tried coffee
I thought I should give it a chance and have been trying several types to try to find something I like.
Almost all the types I tried were disgusting
It tasted nothing like it smelled, making me think that perhaps I was fighting a losing battle
Then I discovered the coffee they were serving at the cafeteria.
When I first tasted it,  I was in heaven
This wasn't the bitter, gag-inducing liquid I had been forcing myself to gulp down; in fact, it hardly tasted like coffee at all
I knew this creamy drink lay on the pansy end of the spectrum, but I saw it as my gateway drug into the world of coffee drinkers.
I tried to look up the nutrition information so I could be aware and better control my portions
It was labelled as 'French Vanilla Supreme' on the machine, but I could only find creamer of that name
I figured that was just the name the school decided to give it.
I was just sitting down thinking about all the things that didn't add up: its taste and consistency, the fact that it didn't give me a caffeine buzz, the fact it was served in a different machine than the other coffee and wasn't even labelled as coffee
All this lead to my epiphany--- that I haven't been drinking coffee at all; I've been drinking 1-2 cups of creamer a day
I feel like an idiot.
tl;dr: Tried to get into coffee, ended up drinking a shit ton of creamer
Something incredible, yet rather bizarre, has just happened to me
I'm a bit flustered and I just need to tell someone.
OK, I must warn you that this is a long and strange story
Sit down, bust out the popcorn, and prepare to be underwhelmed.
A year or so ago, I was sitting around watching youtube
I didn't have adblock at the time, so I was watching an ad for the Seat Toca (a car)
There was a song in the background of this ad, and I loved it
The ad was only about 30 seconds long, but the song was bloody amazing
I was immediately determined to find this song.
I started watching the ad on repeat, trying to figure out the lyrics so I could google the song and find it (my usual strategy)
But nothing turned up.
People in the comments section were discussing the song; several other people were trying to find it
Someone said it sounded like a guy called Mike something (I can't remember the full name of the artist)
So I searched for Mike something, and went through a lot of his discography
But still - no luck
I tried searching his name + the lyrics, but..
nothing.
I tried using shazam
For those who aren't familiar, this is an app that uses the microphone on your phone to identify songs
The idea is that you play the song, turn on the app, and the app will tell you the name and artist of the song
But shazam was bloody hopeless, and couldn't identify the song
I downloaded the app, just for this one song, and deleted it when it failed me.
At this point, I must admit that I was watching the 30-second ad once or twice a day, just so I could listen to the song, no matter how briefly.
My next step was to email the Seat marketing department
I'm deadly serious, I actually did this
I sent a polite email, asking what the song was called
A few days later, I got a reply
The Seat employee told me that the song was a special commission for this particular ad, and wasn't available for general release
Essentially, it's not a real song, and there's no way to find it.
I was heartbroken, but also felt a certain sense of closure
I popped back into the youtube comment section, and let everyone know about my findings
I had been keeping my IRL friends updated throughout this entire saga
They found it hilarious, and mocked me for the effort I was expending in order to find this song
I'm the kind of guy who can be very determined - if I want something, I'll put a lot of effort into getting it
This was just another weird project of mine, which unfortunately didn't work out.
But so it goes
I moved on
I almost forgot about the song.
Fast forward to today, about one year after I originally heard the song
I get a random PM on Reddit
It's from a user I've never spoken to; a user who frequents subreddits that I'm not subscribed to
I have no idea who this person is.
So im literally paid to use reddit now
Part of a marketing team and had a meeting regarding advertising/distribution channels
The usual answers of linkedin, facebook were discussed when i suggested reddit.
The people had no idea what reddit was and for what we were doing (business intelligence and visual analytics ) it just so happened to be quite apropos.
So now i have a team of scientists backing me up to make shit posts on reddit.
Hows your day

Something neat happened to me last night.
I was in my living room at around 11 PM, and I heard a rustling and clattering on the back porch
I peeked out the window and saw a raccoon playing with some cat toys we'd left out
So I went up to the sliding glass door and laid on my stomach, just looking out until the raccoon noticed me
He came up to the window, and looked at me
Our noses were like two inches apart (with the glass between us, of course) and he put his little paw up against the glass like he was saying hello
I'd never been so close to a completely wild animal before
It was kind of exciting, and he was really cute
We just looked at each other for a bit before he wandered off.
I thought this was neat, but I know it's not exactly the most exciting story
Still, I really wanted to share it with someone, so I hope you guys don't mind hearing about it :)
Do you ever have a really good realistic dream and wake up and think "wow my life sucks"

Just had an amazing dream in which I fell in love with this amazing girl, and in this dream I just felt so happy and content
Eventually I woke up (obviously), but this wave of disappointment just passed over me very hard when I did
Sometimes I feel so dissatisfied with my current situation when compared with that kind of contrast
Does this kind of thing happen to you guys

I left my wallet with $454 cash in a Barnes and Noble bathroom today
I remember the exact amount as it was all of the money I had to my name.
After a shockingly rapey turn of events last week (I did not know this, but if you're behind on debt to a state University, they can take every last cent from your bank (or in this case, credit union) account, I had no money left at all
They cleared me plum out in one fell swoop in the name of a "tax levy"
It wasn't a great deal of money to most, perhaps, but to me that $1,440 was months of working hard and scrambling to put a bit away, in my case to get out of a really bad, verbally abusive house/relationship.
Yes, it's totally my fault
But it was a hugely devestating reality to face as a person without a degree or much income, despite working my butt off.
Anywho, feeling deeply betrayed by my credit union/college/the state/etc, and also fearful it may happen again, I cashed my last paychecks, feeling that at least the state government couldn't get my money if it was in my wallet
I have every intention of paying them back when I'm able, but I have more pressing bills to pay right now, I'd like to keep eating, etc.
So, today I did something dumb
I left my wallet in a bathroom stall at Barnes and Noble, where I'd been with a disabled client I work with.
I didn't realize until we were at Aldi, to use his meager $12 monthly food stamps to get something to make lunch with
Well....
I called B&amp;N, someone had turned it in, and I drove back a nervous wreck to pickup my wallet at the resister, only to find Every
Single
Dollar
still in my wallet
All four hundred and fifty four of them
 Ahhhh

Immense gratitude abounded
 I ended up buying my client a bunch of groceries, on me, and cooking him up 10 individually wrapped meals for the week
My tiny way of paying it back.
Thank you kind, honest soul who turned in my wallet
 Thank you kind, honest soul at the resister who left it be.
Thank you, thank you, thank you universe

My cat that went missing 6 years ago has been found

I can't believe it, I just want to talk about him all day
He got in the back of a carpet fitters van without the driver realising and we never saw him since
We searched a lot and left posters everywhere but to no avail.
My mum got an email from a local vets yesterday asking her to call.
Benjie had been found

 What the heck
I thought he was dead..
I never thought I would see him again
It's so surreal I can't get over it that he's here
I'm terrified of him going again
He's 9 years old now and we still have his brother too
We have 4 cats now

He's also lost weight and looks so different from what I remember but he's as loving as he ever was before
(https://imgur.com/a/wfYCh, you can see the difference from the one photo I have of him
)
Do you have any pets
 Do you have any happy ending missing stories too
 I'd love to hear them, I'm so happy and hopefully this gives others who have a missing pet some faith
:)
Do you ever look back on a past "version" of yourself and think "wow, I was so naive and stupid, what was I thinking
" But then start to worry about what you'll think of your current self in the future

Around 3 months ago I started getting into it
I tried a hot pineapple pizza with jalapenos and hot sauce
The heat really goes well with the sweet
Now whenever I go to a pizza place, I want to try one of their Hawaiian pizzas
Anyone else a fan of the forbidden (pizza) fruit

I just proposed to my girlfriend
She said yes



I’m a Dutch girl travelling through the US with my friend who’s American but has a Dutch accent
We where talking as we paid for a hotel room and the lady behind the counter asked us where we where from, I like talking about my country so I told her I’m from the Netherlands
Her response
 “Oh, where is that
 Never heard of that place”
Amsterdam didn’t ring a bell either
Or Belgium
(My friend told her it was a neighbouring country) And earlier this vacation a different guy asked me if my country was ‘developed’ and he was surprised when I told him it was.
I’ve met a lot of super nice Americans who did know at least a little about my country, and I don’t blame people for not knowing about it but still
 I can’t help but be a little offended
I know my country is small, but it played its part in the history of the world and it’s not like it’s completely irrelevant on a global scale

Has this happened to others
 And am I wrong to be bothered by it

Also, this was in Phoenix, Arizona, not in some secluded rural area where people don’t have internet access
Given the time it is now, no one will probably see this but I'M GOING TO BE A DADDY



Just found out and I am so happy right now


Obligatory edit: Jesus, front page really
 I've been a redditor for a few years now and I gotta say I'm overwhelmed by your support (except for that one guy who said he wanted to have sex with my unborn child but hey, internet am I right
)
Anyway thanks for the love and I'll make sure in 8/9 months to show my baby off to you guys

My dad who loved Peter Pan peanut butter just passed away
We had people bring jars of it to his service to donate to local food pantries
What started as a little idea has grown: our local news wants to do a story on it and Peter Pan themselves have reached out to me
It feels good

My dad was the most caring and giving man I know
He would literally give the shirt off his back for anyone
We had over 750 people come to his calling hours and collected hundreds of jars of peanut butter for homeless people in our area, with more jars still coming to us
It's such a great thing to see when it seems like all the main headlines in news today are tragedies
Just thought I'd share this story with you guys

The Mohawk Valley Community Action Agency 9882 River Road Utica, NY 13502
Thanks so much to everyone who wishes to donate more peanut butter
This is taking off much more than I ever hoped it would
Know a lot of people will benefit greatly from your generosity

I've legitimately died before and can tell you what it's like.
So I was telling an acquaintance about this and he thought it was pretty interesting, so I thought I would share it with you guys.
About 6 years ago my friend and I were on our way to pick up another friend from work at around 10pm
He was the driver and I was the passenger
We approach the intersection of my friends work traveling about 55mph (88kph) and as we’re entering the intersection a girl on her phone ran the red light at about 70mph (113kph) and we T-boned her
My seatbelt ripped the buckle from its housing and I went through the windshield.
I’m awake and conscious
I stand up and reach for my phone in my pocket; my arm feels like it’s on fire but I get my phone out and dial 911 through the lock screen
I look down and I’m pouring blood onto the street, as in a nice steady stream is making a puddle
People that had seen the accident, including the friend we were picking up, stop and watch me in horror as I walk around and hand my now blood covered phone my friend who is still stuck in the car
He takes it and I proceed to lean against the car.
An ambulance shows up, straps me to a board, and starts to load me into the back
As the as the stretcher is being loaded into the ambulance my mom showed up at the scene of the accident
I never saw her but I heard her yell "I love you, *****,” I tried really hard but I wasn't able to reply.
While I was in the ambulance, I started feel odd and, although it’s weird to say, I could tell that my body was giving up on me.
In the beginning my fingers started to go numb, at first in the pins and needles sense and then I couldn't feel them at all
I remember touching them with my thumbs and thinking about how weird it was
My vision blurred and would go in and out of blackness
I coughed out a "thank you" and for some reason an "I'm sorry" to the person who was working on me in the ambulance
I closed my eyes and I thought about my how my friend would probably blame himself and how my Mom would handle it (I was 21 and still lived with her.) My body started to feel really light, and I tried to touch my thumbs to my fingers again but my hands wouldn't move
Everything seemed quiet to me, I could see that the person was trying to talk to me but it was like I was selectively tuning him out
Instead I could hear my heart beat steadily getting further and further apart.
My final though was "I wish I had replied to her." (referring to my mom's "I love you.") After that everything went black, just like falling asleep.
I was defibrillated, and let me tell you, it’s a total sensory overload
It’s like being kicked in the chest, it tastes and smells like hot copper, you see a blinding white flash, and you hear an enormous BANG all at the same time.
After I was defibrillated I had 4 shots of Epinephrine to make my heart beat steady
The guy in the ambulance was literally crying because I had apologized to him before he had lost me
I later found out that my heart had stopped for 113 seconds.
Not an experience that I’d recommend to anybody, but interesting to know about nonetheless.
Today, age 20, I saw a healthy weight on the scale for the first time in my entire life
Need somewhere to brag :)
TL;DR was fatass, now a nominally healthy less-fatass
motivational circlejerk at the bottom
I was overweight/obese for as long as I can remember
I was teased as far back as 1st grade and I remember feeling ashamed of shopping in the husky section for clothes (which, now that I think about it, is a shitty name to subject fat kids to)
I always tried fad diets but never lost more than 5lbs
per attempt.
Age 15, I was 215lbs, the highest I've been, and considered obese at my height
I had to train for 1 year for my black belt which involved a shitload of cardio
I had just gotten into reddit and found out about r/keto and r/ketorecipes
I was desperate so I tried it, and I wound up coming down to 165 in that year
That was still overweight but I was able to keep up with all the other trainees.
For the next 3 years I periodically tried more keto but couldn't find the motivation to stick with it now that I wasn't training for my black belt
So I stayed overweight
This semester, I dragged a friend, also looking to lose weight, into it with me and I guess that's all the motivation we needed
We've run a mile and biked 3-4, 3x a week for the past 2 months and stuck fast to the diet
Coincidentally, he's also lost 25lbs and feels amazing.
Today we went to the gym, I weighed myself, and I turned out to be 145, the exact weight where overweight stops and healthy starts according to BMI for my height
Like I said, I have no recollection of this ever happening in my life
This is a new, exciting thing for me
I still have some fat to burn off but just the  idea of being healthy for once is amazing.
The funniest thing about all this, for me, is that I'm short and have barely grown at all since my early teens
And I was already overweight back then
So I'm pretty sure I weigh less now than I did at age 12.
Sorry for the rant, I'm just excited
I never would have thought this would be possible, but here I am
Thanks for reading, if you have indeed read this all
If anybody is trying to lose weight, please remember that it's hard but definitely possible
And if anybody needs help, motivation, or advice with their own weight loss, please feel free to ask via comment or PM
Of course, there's r/keto and r/ketorecipes as well.
Does anyone else get 'Friendship crushes', where you have this urge to be someones friend because you realized they're amazing

In the most non sexual or loveydovey way, sometimes when I find a person who seems so wholesome I get this weird crush want to be their friend
Mostly in a way that I really wanna get to know them and their thoughts and have cool conversations but also I want to be a part of their life
I'd apply myself to situations where we could get to know each other etc
All the absolute best friends I've ever had in the world were a result of this :)
Asking out my crush in about an hour, wish me luck
This has been a long time coming but I am finally gonna muster all the courage I can and ask out my crush on a date
Also putting this down makes me feel obligated so I don't chicken out
Today's my 13th birthday and I have nobody to celebrate it with
Todays my 13th bday, and my mom has work the entire day, she isnt able to get a vacation day, I have no brothers or sisters so I cant do anything with them
(btw I was born 3:30 PM, march 23 2004)
I realized I was "officially" an adult last night when I checked the weather to see if it was going to rain or if I needed to water my plants
<_<
There's no turning back now
 😂
I wish there was an app as popular as Tinder that was just for making friends...
I've found that the only downside for me being in a relationship is that I miss how much fun it can be to talk to tons of people on Tinder
I want to be able to have those get to know each other conversations that are strictly platonic, you know

English is not my first language and I just learned that porcupines and concubines are, in fact, not the same thing.
I also thought hiatus was a state of America
And I used to pronounce comfortable like comfort-table until I was 13
Yeah
What are some misconceptions about the English language you had, native speaker or not

• You know that bit in Alejandro by Lady Gaga that goes "hot like Mexico, rejoice"
 I thought "Mexico rejoice" was a hot sauce that Lady Gaga was comparing this Alejandro guy to, because he was just so hot
• I mentioned this in the comments too, but I used to pronounce British like "Braytish"
• I thought fetish was another word for admiration
I may or may not have used that word in that context
• I thought plethora was some sort of plant.
If you ever have Russian guests, give them fruit,
I have been hosting some Russian clients and their families for the past few days, we do full day boat trips in South  a Florida and usually provide lavish platters with snacks, cold meats and fruit, I freaked out for a second there thinking the platters where incomplete but after further observation I realised that they where all, from grandmother's to toddlers digging into the fruit platters like there was no tomorrow
 I made a friendly comment along the lines of "gee you guys really love my fruit platters" but then one of the adults explained to me that in Russia, fruit is outrageously expensive and basically inaccessible to the general population, so when they come to the USA they really love eating fruit,
The next few days I made MASSIVE platters with mangos and lychees and papaya and all sorts of amazing fruit in great quantities, they showed so much gratitude for that gesture it made me very happy to make them so happy, I just can't imagine being somewhere where you can't afford fruit

And it brings me to my next point, what are things that maybe the general population take for granted but are difficult to get in other places

I have social anxiety as well as color blindness and I went to buy clothes all by myself for the first time
Yay

I was afraid of going to some shop like a small cloth shop where i have to interact with people because i have social anxiety and color blindness
It was embarrassing for me to ask the shopkeeper to get me a light blue shirt while pointing at a pink one
The social anxiety part was also there already
I was afraid of doing anything alone
But i decided to get rid of my social anxiety and this was the first step i took
I am pretty happy with myself right now
I am feeling relieved, and optimistic
Has anyone gone through similar situation

I hope it looks good
I still don't know what color the pant is, i bought it coz i think it looks good
The shopkeeper said it's kinda green
And btw thanks to everyone for such positive comments, you guys are awesome

I just checked off one of my minor long-term goals in life that I had more or less given up on.
For the last 10 or 15 years I had always wanted to see someone using a monocle in real life.I don't remember where this desire originally came from but I would have been in high school at the time.It couldn't be a part of a costume, or someone 'ironically' using one to be trendy; it had to be an old man or woman going about their daily life with a genuine use of a monocle.
Usually I don't do my grocery shopping until late in the evening
I'm not particularly fond of crowded places and there's far fewer people doing a shop at 8 or 9pm.I have a lot to get done this evening, so I had to get it out of the way earlier in the day
I figured 2:30 in the afternoon would be perfect; well after lunchtime and just before the supermarket goes apeshit with screaming kids having just been picked up from school.
I zipped around and grabbed everything on my list and made my way to the checkout where I sidled up behind a sweet old guy pushing 90 years old and started unloading my basket...
And then it happened.
The cashier printed the guy's receipt and handed it to him.It fluttered in his unsteady hands as he squinted at it for a few moments and then reached into his fleece jacket and pulled out what I thought was just a magnifying glass.
He lodged it in his brow and started going over his receipt.
It didn't even register with me at first but then I double-taked when I realised what was going on.Such a beautiful moment that I'd been on the lookout for for over a decade.
I could get hit by a bus tomorrow and I'd be completely fine with it.
Its just a bad day, not a bad life
Felt that maybe someone could use this reminder.
I just had a thought: when people insult themselves, "I'm so ugly.", instead of arguing with them "no you're not
", try "I wish you'd be kinder to yourself."
I wonder what the room thinks of this
 It's still kind of condescending, but it's not a direct argument that will end up in a back and forth about how ugly the subject is.
My friend is homeless for few days and she's staying at my place
I just came from work and saw in the kitchen that she made me a dinner
I want to cry from happiness

Last time somebody made me dinner out of nowhere was like 4 years ago and it was my ex-gf who loved cooking.
It feels so nice to come back to apartment and see dinner ready
I'm gonna devour that chicken with rice with a joy I didn't think was possible.
I love autumn so fucking much
I just love how dark and rainy it gets
 It just makes me feel so good inside
I was too lazy to do the dishes so I bribed my friend with a can of Pringles to come over and do them for me
She woke up from her nap and 5 minutes later was at my doorstep wheezing "WHERE ARE MY PRINGLES"
I don't know which one of us has sunk the lowest but hey, I got squeaky clean dishes with virtually no effort and she got Pringles.
Also, they were sour cream flavored
Edit: Sour cream and onion
Edit 2: I don't think she wants my dong guys, we're just friends
Edit 3: I wish Pringles paid me for this post, I really do
Also r/hailcorporate comments have been done 3 times already, try a new subreddit.
Controversial thought (for reddit), but I think pineapple pizza is good
Anyone else

Today my seven year old came home from school and told me about her day
She started off with dad we had to wear blue to school today cause one of our class mates has a disease
She then told me that the little boy can’t talk cause of issues with his tongue
I responded o well that’s sad she then cut me off and said but it’s okay cause I got to play with him and help him learn with sign language and we had so much fun
I’m very proud of her she has a kind heart and never points out people’s flaws.
I did it.
Finally worked the courage to tell my roommate to lower the music for the first time
He did
Yay
A small victory for me.
I just realized that ftfy meant “fixed that for you” and not “fuck that fuck you”
My mind is blown Edit: okay well apparently everyone else got it wrong too so
Ftfy
I have an important hypothetical question for you all.
Getting better at making eye contact has made me realize how uncomfortable people are with making eye contact
Ever since High School, I was always good at small talk and making brief, casual conversation with people, but I sucked at making eye contact
So I made this a goal of mine to improve and several years later, I think it's one of my social strong suits
When I'm listening to someone or talking directly to them, I always make and maintain eye contact.
But this has made me realize how many people aren't used to that and how many people will look away mid-conversation or glance and look away uncomfortably.
I think it's interesting how that works
We're like..
afraid to just look directly at each other when talking
But I've noticed when I meet people that AREN'T uncomfortable with it, I have a stronger connection and can read the conversation a lot better.
Anyone else notice these things

Met my primary school bully today
Apparently he lives in Denmark now
He did a complete 180 - really nice, seemed genuinely sorry for stuff he did back then
Also he's now a physics teacher, which is weird because I remember his physics being absolutely trash when we were classmates
But it's nice to see people sometimes change for the better.
I tend to assume every user on Reddit is a male until they mention otherwise.
Even when they say "my husband/boyfriend" I just assume they are gay
I don't think this is a good thing.
I went on a second date last night
Our first date was 15 years ago.
We went to the same high school freshman year, then different schools for the other 3 years
 Sophomore year she asked me to her Homecoming dance and we went and had a good time but nothing ever came of it
 Recently we connected on a dating app, and went out for our "second date" last night
 It was pretty great.
That one hour in the morning with your coffee and laptop while everyone else is still asleep.
Anyone else
  Esp now in the fall when its still dark outside
 I get up, feed the cat, light a fire in the fireplace, make a Latte and whip out the Reddit
 After she eats, the cat will usually curl up next to me.
It is my favorite time of the day.
After the kids get up its a whirlwind of getting them ready, getting me ready, and everyone out the door, so now I'm waking up extra early just to get that time.
Anyone else savour this time of the day


eta: Good morning
 here i am again, reading responses in the early morn
  I loved this one in particular:
https://www.reddit.com/r/CasualConversation/comments/7aalln/that_one_hour_in_the_morning_with_your_coffee_and/dp8n7yp/
"Makes me feel like I own the day
If I start out rushing to leave, the day owns me."
So, a little mouse just came in my bathroom and asked me to open the door so he could go outside.
So, it's morning here
 I'm sitting in the bathroom like normal, and lo and behold, this tiny little gray field mouse comes skittering across the floor toward me
 (Eek
)  He just stops in the middle of the floor and kinda looks at me and then heads back out into my apartment.
I get done in the bathroom and I go out into the living room, and there he is..
Just sitting on the little patch of tile I have inside my front door
 I go over and I open the door for him and he heads back outside
 I guess he's off to do whatever mice like to do early on Saturday morning
 Maybe get a bagel and a latte
  I have no idea.
Anyway, I thought it was an interesting way to start the day.
I just witnessed a girl at the gym turn on the treadmill to the highest setting
She had both feet on the side of the machine while she was on her phone
She did that for about 30-40 minutes without ever running
Then, she left
It was the weirdest thing I've ever seen, what's your take on it

I'm still puzzled, I don't know why she did that.
I have an in person job interview today for a career opportunity in my field
After months of phone rejections, job applications, a messed up laptop, eating ramen, I finally get to see someone face to face for an interview.
Most career opportunities start off with a brief phone call to see if you're the right fit
I've done so many of those, that I always wondered if I was doing something wrong in my spheal
I never would get a call back
A week later, they would express their feelings that they decided to peruse other candidates at this current time
In fact, I've been so used to rejection that I went in the mindset that I would be rejected anyways
Eventually it became why even apply.
I graduated last year and will make roughly two years I've been out of college
It's been a long, tedious process
I've been heartbroken, laptop gave way, wasted money, had to refuse extra hours at work to accommodate phone interviews, and then suffer by paying rent, but then eating ramen, and not to mention all the nights of forgoing celebrating with friends and family, in lieu of busting out one more job application, thinking hopefully this is the one, the lucky one that might grant me a call back..
I cannot tell you how much I'm in awe that someone could make the choice to see the potential in me
It's mellowing and mind blowing to say the least
The job search has been grueling and gruesome, to say the least.
I've thought of giving up, way too many times, way more then I can count, and this one means the world to me
Even if this isn't the career opportunity I have spent all this time looking for, just having the opportunity to view and see in person an actual company, an actual recruiter, I'm so touched and proud.
Wish me luck
I didn't know where else to post this, because I didn't want to jinx it, knock on wood, but this is it.
If I don't get this, I just might work up the retail ladder
This is my last shot....
Told my GF I loved her for the first time
Never been happier in my life
I was so nervous asking her, even though she told me a few weeks ago that, if I asked, she'd say yes
We're currently long distance and asked her over Skype, but we had already had plans in motion for getting a place together
I didn't actually have a physical ring either, so I showed her a picture of what I had picked out
It was a good thing too because, while she liked the ring, she had already had a few ideas of her own, so now we're both looking at rings together
I'm so elated right now
I just wanted to share it with somebody.
Anyone else have any nontraditional proposals

A little girl called me "Mr."
I'm 19 years old
I feel bad
My country is finally free and I’m ecstatic

For those that haven’t heard the good news yet, 93 year old dictator Robert Mugabe resigned as Zimbabwe’s President  today after massive protests in the country all week
 I was born and raised in Zimbabwe and lived under his regime my entire life (I’m only 16
) but the amount of joy that’s reverberating throughout the streets right now is incredible
I know this isn’t a political forum or anything, but I just wanted to share my excitement for a new era in my country
 I feel fantastic 

I'm so happy today I'm so close to 1000 karma
I don't know what that means to you but I like smallest of social appreciation
Makes a man's day sitting alone in the house for days
When I get to 1000 karma I'm thinking about going out and have pasta.
Today, I am presenting as a woman for the first time in my life.
I'm a trans woman, and I am finally being myself starting today
I've waited my whole life for this, and it's pretty nerve-racking, in a good way.
Today is a good great day

Update: My day was awesome
 I've found peace after so many years...
Thank you all so much for the positivity
I'm humbled by how many of you are so wholesome and accepting
You move me to tears
I am not lying when I say I couldn't have done this without the strength and courage that everyone who supports me gave me, including all of you
Thank you.
In a almost totally empty movie theater, a guy sat right next to me, and asked me if I could move over to someplace else for a friend
And I couldn't muster the courage to answer with a simple 'No'.
Only 2 other seats were occupied in the entire theater, and the guy sat right next to me(since I had booked the middle ones) and said he wanted to sit in the middle and asked me to move
I felt so powerless that I quietly disappeared into the shadows
The worse part was, both the seats were actually mine(I had booked 2 seats due to a promo offer, however I was watching alone) and I still couldn't sit where I wanted to.
It's just the worst and a very emasculating feeling
I don't know why I complied
Or why I even should
The guy wasn't talking rudely to me or ordering me like a bully(I am actually quite fit, not ripped, broad shoulders, good height, avg width) but I suddenly got too chicken to say a simple 'No'
Has anyone been in a similar situation
 Why so you think so

*Edited
*Edit- Thanks to everyone who replied
 I can't reply to everyone, but I'm trying to read all comments I can between my short study breaks.
Anyone else feel extremely nervous while posting on Reddit

I lose my shit when I'm trying to post something
I end up putting way too much effort into the title, the post and everything else because I am afraid that people might downvote me and disagree
Ok, putting it this way sounds stupid but I think you guys get what I mean

What a time to be alive
I'm scared because of the darn internet
Girl just sang her heart out in math class
We were alll just sitting around talking since we didnt have any work to do, then one of the girls in my glass played a video of her friend singing
Everyone started saying that she should sing for us, and so she did
Holy titballs it was great
Her voice was powerful and had a distinctive crack to it
Not a bad voice crack like a preteen talking, but one that just adds a layer of emotion to the song
It definitely surprised everyone in there, and I think she could have a career in music
I adopted a teenage boy update.
Hello, my name is Jack
I'm sorry I haven't updated in 2 months
I am a 50 year old man who was never able to conceive with my wife
We really wanted to adopt but were unable to due to financial issues until recently.
As you may know we adopted a 15 year old boy named Jonathan
He has been dealing with depression, anxiety, anger issues, PTSD, and an eating disorder.
So what's changed since two months ago when we had recently adopted him

For starters, Jonathan was kicked out of yet another school quickly for fighting (the school he had been in before we adopted him but only for like a couple months) so we decided to put Jonathan in a special school for troubled youth.
Although it's a very slow process and he still skips class and gets in fights this school is definitely doing some good
They focus on how to fit into the world, mental health, anger management, all stuff relevant to Jonathan's life.
Jonathan still smokes
I found text messages on his phone between him and another boy about a drug transaction
The drug in question was oxycodone
I asked him (in a pub casually so that he felt relaxed and not pressured) why he wanted this drug; opiates, while providing pain relief, can be very addictive and dangerous.
He basically told me that his pain and trauma are bigger than anything pot and cigarettes could help with
I told him its a very bad idea to buy opiates off the street and if he is looking for help all he needs to do is ask and we will try to help best we can
So, I scheduled an appointment with the doctor
He agreed not to go through with the transaction so I told him I was proud of him and I swear he smiled a little bit.
I love my husband AND his social anxiety.
Yesterday, my husband ended up at a drive through coffee shop after work
He was expecting the McDonalds set up with a posted menu and a speaker box, so when he pulled up and was face to face with a human, he panicked
The first thing he saw on the menu was called a "not too hot." His order went something like this...
"Uhh, Uhh, I'll get a not too hot."
"Do you have kids
"
"What
"
"Sir, that's a kid's hot chocolate
Are you ordering for a kid
"
"No
Uh Uh, can you make it big
"
"How big
"
"Medium."
And that's the story of how my husband ended up with a hot chocolate when he wanted coffee.
Just wanted to say thanks to the guy who just gave my girlfriend €50 when she panicked at 1.30 am with no access to funds and no way home.
A broken atm card, and some drinks lead to an upset lady
He overheard her phone conversation with me, handed her the cash and walked off without a name or a number
Strangers can care too some times
So thank you.
Does anyone hate when you see a thread that you have a good comment for, but the thread was made 5+ hours ago and your comment feels useless

This happens to me all the time
I want to comment, but it will just get lost since it's too late and just gets thrown to the bottom of the thread
I hate it lol
At 37 years old I still have a recurring dream that I've forgotten one of my college classes and haven't gone all semester.
Crazy how many people share this dream with such similarity
 I should log what's going on the next time I have this dream
TIL Reddit is loaded with stressed people.
There should be a subreddit for pairing people up to do nothing except check in on each other once or twice a week to ask how their day has been.
It would be casual, a bit like this subreddit, except only 2, at most 3, people would come together together to talk, probably via DM.
It would also be a bit like having a penpal, except with penpals there's generally an expectation that you'd have interesting things to say, that you'd write a certain amount, reply a certain amount
Here there would be no such expectation
You can write as little or as much as you like, on totally boring subjects, and the other person would be under no obligation to reply with anything other than an acknowledgement, like, "that sucks, hope you're feeling better," or, "that's cool."
What do you think
 Would it work
 Maybe it needs thinking through a bit more
Something you'd be interested in participating in

happy new years, for those of us spending it on reddit
 comment one of your resolutions/hopes and ill draw an animal cheering you on
or just comment something for me to draw for you to kick off the new year with kindness haha
gf broke up with me on the eve so i want to spread positivity around for us down on the new year :)
Unemployed for a month starting to feel hopeless and really down
Just got two calls for interviews out of nowhere
Had to tell someone

I've been applying heavily since before being let go at the beginning of December (they found out I was looking and fired me)
I've been feeling really down about myself lately and not having much hope
I'd been on several interviews, but passed over for one reason or another.
Well, today I got two phone calls for two different positions in my field
I couldn't be happier, and I just had to tell someone

I took myself on a date for my birthday
Without giving you all the blah blah of my life, I was feeling pretty down about celebrating my birthday alone this year
I'm living a 13h flight away from most of my friends and family
I had dinner plans tonight with one of my only friends here but he cancelled yesterday because he's jetlagged
I didn't have the heart to tell him it's my birthday
Most people at work didn't know and I got invited to another colleague's birthday cake surprise which was also today and someone must have let people know about mine because they scrambled a card together and awkwardly yelled "surprise" at me when I walked in.
Tbh, I felt like crying all day
I'm pretty lonely here if I'm truely honest
I just wanted to go home and hide under the covers.
But on my way home I thought, "no
"
I bought myself some pretty roses, bought a bottle of my favourite wine, lit some candles, ordered some tasty food and watched my all-time favourite movie
A date for one
I don't feel like crying anymore :)
What are your ways for overcoming those tough, lonely days

All the best to all you wonderful people

I just got my first paycheck and I can somewhat breathe.
I’m 25 and I finally got a full time job
 I moved to a new city with my dog and really started this life on no money
 I’ve been running on $100 my mom gave me for 3 weeks
My credit cards had about $700 on them and I owe my dad $500.
This morning I saw an email I finally got paid, even though I started my job 2 weeks ago
Some people told me I wouldn’t get paid for 4 weeks.
I just saw the deposit and I felt this huge burden come off my shoulders
 I paid off my credit cards immediately.
I’m still feeling a little survival-mode because it’s only my first paycheck and I’m scared I’ll run out before my next one..
but damn.
So I just got a warning on my cell phone..
The type of noise for an Amber Alert or Flash Flood..
But it says "MISSILE INBOUND SEEK SHELTER THIS IS NOT A DRILL"
I just went to my car and checked a few radio stations, but none of them are even mentioning it.
Nothing on the news..
wth

Did someone hack the alert system for hawaii and send out a bogus alert

Got called an old man today
Im 23.
A child walked up to me today and started a conversation.
KID: You are an old man ME: Am I
 I didn't think I was, I dont even have grey hair yet
KID: When you get old in a bit, will you have grey hair
ME: Probably KID: My grandad shaved all his hair off
 Hahahaha
ME: Some peoples hair just falls off when they get older
KID: Yeah
And they have a beard
ME: Do you think I should grow a beard
KID: No
You are going to get old
ME: Hopefully
KID: And get grey hair
 ME: I hope not
 KID: And then you will die
You will get grey hair, then die
KID runs off and plays
I thought it was funny
Also I feel old.
Kung fu Panda saved my life.
When I was going through a severe clinically depressive time in my 20s, I was very inactive
Mostly, I would lock myself in my apt and avoid everything.
When I first watched this movie, it made me laugh for the first time I quite a while
I remember feeling something other than despair.
Thus began my path to betterment
I would watch it multiple times a day
It would be in the background ayong as I prepared myself  for the day, while I cooked, while I studied, and everything inbetween.
It wasn't only the humor
It was also the message
There is no secret ingredient to happiness
I internalized this and it really seemed to help.
Fast forward multiple years, and this movie still hits me in the feels
It makes me emotional when I watch it.
I LOVE Kung Fu Panda

How do I ask someone their name when they already know me by name.
There is this dad at my daughter’s school whom I’ve met several times.
The first time we met, we introduced ourselves and since then we've talked with each other several times.
The problem is that I never remembered his name, yet he remembered mine.
He always verbalized my name every time we met, but unfortunately I could not do the same so I got stuck with the generic “Man”.
Any time we met, I said: “What’s going on, Man
 How are you
 Good to see you.”
At one point it became awkward so I decided to ask his name, but I didn't want to say, “Sorry, I forgot your name” because that would have implied that I never knew it all along, so I decided to go with a different approach.
The next time I talked with him at my daughter’s school, midway through I looked at him and said:
“You know, my wife and I have been discussing about how to pronounce your name properly
We just don’t seem to agree and I don’t like to mispronounce anybody’s name
Can you pronounce it for me exactly as your mom pronounces your name
”
The guy looks at me with eyes wide open and says:
“Joe”
I doubt it matters, but I'm actually proud of myself for resisting the urge to order junk food lastnight
I seriously had some major cravings lastnight, from Chinese food to eventually landing on pizza
I was in my room, already in the process of ordering pizza on my phone..
and then just decided not to.
It was a really weird feeling, to be honest
I didn't decide "Actually it doesn't sound that good after all"
I was intensely craving it, to the point I felt like I could actually picture how it tastes in my mind
And I remember thinking "Well, if you can remember how it tastes, that's probably a super bad sign and I've clearly not gone long enough since eating it".
So, I couldn't find anything at home I felt like eating, so I literally just forced myself to go to bed, to avoid eating out.
It's a small, stupid thing, but I'm honestly kind of proud of myself
I've never been able to resist food cravings like that, so waking up this morning, I felt like I already had a minor "win" under my belt, which is kind of a nice feeling.
Now, I just need to keep this up for the rest of the year, and maybe I'll be at a weight I'm happy with...
Drunk me gave sober me a present

I put on a pair of pants that I hadn't worn since New Years
When I put my phone in my pocket I could feel something else in there, so I pulled it out and found a cheeky $50 note in my pocket
 I had a flashback and remember being drunk putting that $50 in my pocket and thinking 'sober me is going to be so happy next time he wears these pants'..
I certainly was

I know Fergie probably isn't a Redditor, but just in case she sees this:
Yes, her rendition of the National Anthem was..
not great
But I feel like the people of the internet forget celebrities are people, too, and they're being really harsh.
There was a Reddit confession from am anonymous A-lister a few months ago where the gal talked about reading through the malicious comments about her on social media and getting more and more depressed
The post was eventually locked because people kept trying to guess who she was
(Many people seem to think it was Kim Kardashian.)
That post really hit me, because she was venting that she was so depressed because of this internet bullying that the only reason she hadn't committed suicide was because of her family and kids.
So, not knowing where else to post this, I just wanted to say that while Fergie may not have done a great job singing the anthem, she's still a human being with real emotions
People need to take a chillaxative and quit being so harsh over something so relatively inconsequential.
Just because someone is famous, or just because you've never met them, doesn't make it any less serious or hateful to bash on them
It's still bullying.
I guess I'm just venting because people reeaally like to jump on the bashing bandwagon and I'm sick of it
That is all.
Thank you to all the lovely people who took part in this post, whether for or against this opinion
I'm happy this started a good discussion.
Today I brought my own straws to a restaurant and a friend of mine thought it was ridiculous
They are washable stainless steel straws, in order to avoid using plastic straws
 I’m trying really hard to reduce my plastic consumption in general
 The friend that was with me spent the rest of the night making fun of me, trying to debunk the efficacy of my choices, and in general trying to convince me that plastic and the convenience it creates is actually good.
I’m really baffled that this day and age, and educated person under 40 actually thinks trying to improve ones habits with regard to the environment is a bad thing
  Am I in the minority here
 I’m not perfect, but at least I’m trying.
My boyfriend thought "season to taste" meant season until you can taste it and I couldn't love him more.
We were cooking together and he said that the recipe didn't specify how much salt and pepper to use
It had just listed them in the ingredients
I told him it's based on how salty he likes the food and to season to taste.
He said that's not what he thought season to taste meant and that he would just salt it until you can barely taste the salt.
It kind of just made me realize how much we're learning from each other and that this is something he's trying to do learn for me even though he doesn't like to cook.
I’m really proud of how well I’m doing in college
Alright, I really don’t like bragging but I can’t help but feel really proud of myself lately for how well i’ve been doing in school, and I can’t talk to my friends about this bc they’re struggling in college with their grades so if i told them I was proud of mine, that would definitely be a dick move so I’m just gonna say it here:
I wasn’t a great student in high school
I was lazy and unmotivated and had like a 2.5 GPA
I thought I would never go anywhere in life and I was never thought of as “smart.” Well now I’m in college and for the first time since like middle school, I have a 4.0
I finally decided to get my shit together and actually try my best
Last week in my trig class, we had our second test of the semester and I got 100%
Not because the test was easy, I actually struggled a lot with that chapter and was very lost and confused but I worked my ass off and studied for weeks leading up to the test and managed to actually get 100%
The week before, I got 100% on my philosophy test, and then before that a 100% on my geography test (my teacher told me I got the highest grade in the class)
It feels so awesome to see your hard work pay off
It’s a very liberating feeling when you finally realize that you are in charge of your own success and education and that if you put in the hard work, you will see great results
I’m not lazy anymore like I used to be in high school and I don’t procrastinate anymore, I’ve really transformed my work ethic and study habits and it feels fucking awesome
That is all, thank you strangers for reading this :)
I got lucky tonight
This happened just a few minutes ago
Imagine this: it's 1am, you're hungry as hell and drunk as fuck
The fridge is literally empty and the nearby shop won't open for another 6 hours
All the fast food places that are open at this hour are too far away.
That was me
So I went into the kitchen and searched through every single cabinet
When I was about to open the last one I had lost hope
That's why I had to do a double take when I peeked inside
There were two packs of beef noodles in the darkest corner of the cabinet
The cheapest noodles available have never looked that good.
The water is about to boil and my hunger will be satisfied
I got so lucky.
I'm a Toys R Us employee, I have to be at work at 7 tomorrow, and I can't even think about sleep right now.
As Toys R Us closes I get to look at it from the side of the employees
It's been a weird couple of days and its a bit surreal
The last thing I needed in my life was to lose my job, and that's what is about to happen.
While I'm incredibly depressed about my job and other things in my life
I do whatever I can to keep my mind off of the bad stuff
So I'm up to talk to anyone who wants a conversation
Im gonna be up a while.
It’s 'per se' not 'persay'/'per say'

I somehow saw a dozen people on Reddit writing this wrong today and just needed to throw this in the round, because I get the need to be a smartass, but then I don’t correct them and now it’s in the back of my head and that’s why I made this.
Probably the wrong sub, but it really irks me that so many people write such simple things so wrong.
I learned a small (but sweet) thing about my BF that I want to share.
We don't live together but I stay at his place very often
He works from home so when I'm having my shower he'll get up and make us both coffee.
He has an aeropress so he'll make one cup, rinse it out, make the next cup.
This morning when I got to the bottom of the cup I got a mouthful of coffee grinds, I reacted to this surprise and he said "Oh, I gave you the wrong cup".
I asked why he has grinds at the bottom of his cup and he told me that it happens when the aeropress hasn't been dried out properly and he just takes the second crappy cup and gives me the nice one.
Such a small thing but I found it really thoughtful and was so touched by it (is that lame
).
What are small but very sweet things that your partners do for you

I saw Black Panther and the most relatable character was the villain.
My teacher called out my paper on “what not to do”
I worked really hard on a paper and it got called out today first thing in class of “what not to do”
The teacher excluded my name and other identifying information but he said that the paper was from someone in the class.
I felt like cold water was being poured down my back, a prickling sensation all over my body, my cheeks burning up, and my stomach was churning
A girl laughed which made me feel worse.
I wrote the paper as best I could, went to the teacher for help, asked for more help over email but each time the teacher just blew me off
I asked other classmates for help too but no one really seemed to understand the paper instructions either
More than half the class did not do well either.
It just felt awful to have my paper called out and used as a prime example of “what not to do”
What a great way to start a Monday.
Don't really have anyone in my life to share the good news with, so here goes.
I GOT A JOB

For the first time in 2 years I am employed

I was finishing my degree until just a few months ago, and for most of my time in school I wasn't able to find a job since I lived in an area that was oversaturated with unqualified students looking for hourly work at restaurants and such
Then these past SIX months I've been legitimately too sick to even consider working.
until literally just a few days ago


I've been going through very expensive and invasive tests these last few months and we're finally starting to figure out what's wrong with me, and I'm finally on medication that helps
For less than a week now I've been pain free and able to live my life like a normal healthy person, which is already so incredible for me since I'd forgotten what it felt like to feel capable and self reliant.
Just a few days ago I decided to go ahead and apply for a job at a nice restaurant up the street, but I wasn't getting my hopes up since I've gotten so used to being rejected from all the jobs I've applied to these past few years
But just yesterday I was interviewed and officially offered the job, and I start next week

I haven't been this happy in such a long time that I don't even remember
I'd completely lost faith in myself and now I actually feel OPTIMISTIC for my future, maybe for the first time ever
Which is kind of scary and unfamiliar
I even baked a huge cake today
 I'm just so happy to be employed that I start crying when I think about it :')
I volunteer to litter pick parks around where I live so that kids don’t have to play around needles, broken glass and general litter.
The amount of times that I’ve been doing it and a mother or carer have loud and blatantly told their kids not to go near the “smelly man”, “dangerous man” and the, I shit you not, “disgusting cunt”.I’m a tall, athletic 22 year old bloke and I’m well groomed, it just shows how people judge you for doing something that they deem below them

Yeah, by all means, be wary of any person wandering through the park, but don’t be rude
 I’m trying to help
 :)
Today is a very special day: as of today, I'm legally a woman named Ayane
Incidentally, today is also my birthday

I'm the same girl from five months ago..
I am now 22, and five hours from the time of posting this, I will have received a decree from the court to make it official.
It's been a long road getting here - a journey full of painful moments and sacrifices, but the fight is finally over
Today marks the beginning of my real journey, the beginning of my life as a woman
I never have to hide what is in my heart ever again.
I'm feeling a strange emotion - it's not exactly joy, but a kind of calmness or serenity
If I die now, I no longer have to worry about the thought of never having existed.
Update: Wow, this blew up
The deed is done
 Thank you all so much for your kind comments
Even if I don't respond to everyone, I'm really happy that you care
You guys are awesome
 &lt;3
What I’ve learned from Reddit.
Since joining reddit, I [18F] have learned many things
Humans are very complex
More complex than I always believed everyone else to be
I have learned that basic human emotions aren’t always basic
One emotion can carry a vast amount of feelings
The word “weird” can have a negative and/or positive connotation
For me: weird means normal
  Humans are weird
That involves me, you, him, her, she, SO, OP, them, and it
Humans are lonely
Humans are also very curious
Humans are nosy And also very sexual I have also found, that some of the most genuine interactions have been over this exact platform
I have learned, how human bodies work, how many people have experienced the same things I have, or wondered the same things as me
It has made me value this universal sacred self
I also now know, I’m not the wisest person in the world, nor am I the most ignorant
It has taught me the importance of finding each other’s sameness, and stop turning shoulders for their differences
I often doubt the compassion of others, and their ability to help
But I’ve learned there is no reason to
Also, what we carry internally, is much more important than what is beyond
Thank you Reddit Have a cool day
-T
Anyone else hate their birthdays because it only makes you realize how lonely you are

I don't have anyone around me to celebrate my b'day with
I plan to go to a nice restaurant for dinner (to treat myself), but on my own
I don't think it's sad
I find it perfectly fine
But this whole day kinda sucks, because it just makes me realize that I don't have any close friends to enjoy this special day with
My boyfriend is currently having a fight with Alexa
He thinks I'm still asleep and I can hear him having a fight with Alexa
While he was in the kitchen he asked her to play Tom Petty on Spotify and she responded with her usual "Playing songs by Tom Petty from Spotify" and then she didn't
Then I heard him storming from the kitchen into the living room shouting "No you're not you lying bitch
"
It's like we live with a moody teenager sometimes, this has made my morning and I cannot stop laughing

Do you use Alexa
 If so what craziness have you found yourself doing because of her

I ruined a family dinner
We were eating and I talked about how some people are just plain racists, and that is when my stepfather started using the "N" word and I told him that I really don't like that word, and suddenly my whole family got hostile real quick
My mom started saying that she didn't say it in a negative way, and I just told her that I prefer not to hear anyone say that word in any meaning or form
This made her really mad and she started ranting about how she could say it, and my stepfather started ranting about how this was his house and he could say whatever.
He left the dinner table, mom also did the same.
So I am now sitting alone eating taco's by myself.
All this because I told them not to use the "N" word around me.
TLDR; Family got angry because I told them that I did not like that they used the "N" word.
I just dropped my entire plate of food into the bath.
Two slices of pizza, two cheese sticks, and a brownie
I hadn't even taken my first bite yet
Now I've ruined my breakfast (don't judge) AND my bath...
I'm a fucking idiot.
...How's your Sunday going CC

I wish society was more accepting towards people who just want to be followers rather than leaders.
I get it
By being a leader, you show that you have strength to take on responsibilities, command, etc
I don't want that
I want to just follow
Growing up, I had to take care of finances and making sure everyone put their share of rent, I had to make sure to wake my sisters up
I had a supervisor stint at work for a bit
I don't like the responsibility
I want to just follow for a bit and sit on the passenger seat.
Very proud dad
Deleting my Facebook was so liberating and made me feel so much better
I miss having something to do but it was a hassle always worrying about it which is why I deleted it, I was becoming too concerned with it
Does anybody else feel that they have no time to do personal/fun stuff during the week, but then can't think of any personal/fun stuff to do on the weekend

I find this quite funny actually
During the week (I work 8-5 and then hit the gym for around 2 hours) I'm always complaining that I have no time to do fun stuff
I don't mean going out and hanging with friends or whatever
Just generic stuff.
Then during the weekend, like today for instance, I've got absolutely nothing to do, and can't think of any of the aforementioned fun stuff that I can do
I'm just sat here in front of the TV watching movies, scrolling reddit
I sometimes switch on my PS4 and play for about 10 minutes, and then realise that it's not really what I feel like doing.
In some ways, I feel like this is a sign that I'm satisfied with my life
Which makes me feel quite good to be honest
I don't need the weekend to fill some void
I've got a good/satisfying/challenging job, I give it my all at the gym to try and improve myself, and a loving girlfriend and family at home.
I've decided that throughout the next week, whenever I feel like doing something that I'm to tired to do at the time, I'm going to take note of it in my phone, and then revisit the list during the weekend.
Does anybody else ever feel like this
 How do you usually fill your bleh time.
At 29 I've finally understood why old people get up early
Not going to go into too much detail about my personal life, but for the longest time I was one of those people who would stay up until 1-2am then head to uni at 9:30-10
Now that I'm a bit older and have a career of sorts, the 6-4:30 work hours have made it so that I can't really afford the luxury of doing that
On a whim one day a few months back, I decided to get up at 5 on my off-day and do what I'd typically do only earlier (grocs, jog, yardwork) and haven't regretted it since.
For starters, the early time means that the city area is mostly 'dead' making tasks way easier, with the time it's taken me to do groceries being reduced by about 10mins or so and my jogging route rarely being hindered by traffic now
The older people I've run into doing both have also been incredibly friendly with most of them saying hello as I've passed by them
There's also the relaxing feeling of it being midday and already having all of the annoying daily stuff being done.
So yeah, that's all I really wanted to say
If anyone has any other questions, feel free to toss'm out there.
I appreciate people who don’t make you feel left out
Tonight, I hung out with my boyfriend and two of his friends, it was just a chill dinner with some Mario party
My boyfriend and his friends all went to the same high school, which was all boys
I went to an all girls high school
Also, they are all into pc and console gaming while I am not, though I do enjoy watching others play and have small interest in it.
So tonight over dinner, all the guys were reminiscing over old gaming and school memories which I had no idea what they were talking about
But I didn’t feel left out at all since I was treated as a member of their conversation - if I’d ask questions in regards to stories or games, they would fill me in and explain so I could understand and appreciate what they were talking about.
I cannot stress how appreciative I am
The fact that they put in effort just so I could follow a story when I could have just been left out and ignored
I’ve had previous encounters where, if I were out of the loop over a certain joke or event and I’d ask about what happened and what everyone else seems to be laughing about, I’d get ignored or be told “you don’t play (insert game here), you wouldn’t understand”
It would make me feel kinda sad hahah.
So thank you to my amazing boyfriend and his great friends for making me feel very welcomed and included tonight, I’m so so super happy because of it :))
I'd like a game show where teams debate a controversial topic, but aren't allowed to openly pick a side and only gain points after arguing for and against
Where the objective is to properly understand both sides.
So an example debate might be "Euthanasia" but rather than having two teams being "For" and "Against", there could be a number of teams and each one would have to put forward arguments for AND against the topic.
The current ideas I had are:
Points could be scored for:
Making good points
Successfully arguing other team's points
Bonus points for making particularly good points or defending from another team's argument.
Points could be lost for:
Showing bias by only arguing for one side
Lying or spreading inaccuracies (False statistics etc.).
Points could be scored by arguing for and against, but only after successfully arguing both sides.
So each point arguing FOR a topic gives -1 point, but if you also have a point AGAINST the topic, they cancel and give 2 points.
Bonus points would be tracked differently
The fact that people would need to remain unbiased while still remaining competitive would mean every argument would need to be airtight or it would be picked apart
People wouldn't be happy to let bad arguments survive simply because they are on the same "side".
There would probably be a panel of relevant experts deciding whether a team's argument is valid, and penalising lies and correcting inaccuracies
Maybe have one person from each side of the argument but they're not revealed until the end, and they might even discuss their favourite points from the side opposing their own
There might even be bonus points for correctly guessing which is which.
I tried to kill myself two months ago
Tomorrow I'm starting my first job in 10 years.
The first time I attempted suicide was almost a decade ago
After spending the majority of the last 9 years in bed, attempting suicide again two months ago, yesterday I had my first job interview in 10 years..
And..
I got the job.
I realise that it may not seem like an achievement or an accomplishment
But nonetheless, I want to share this in hopes that it may help someone somehow.
I don't know where this is going to lead, or whether or not I'm going to stick to it
I am scared, anxious, confused and uncertain but I'm also incredibly proud of myself for not giving up and taking another chance at life.
Thank you for taking the time to read and respond.
I have 1 year sober today
 I should be dead but here I am

I never thought I'd make it to one year
My liver recovered, my cholesterol has gone down, I'm losing weight at a steady pace, and my memory has improved
I'm so grateful to be here.
At age 25, I'll be starting my first job tomorrow
Yes
You read that right
It's taken me this long to get my life together and actually be ready for work
I used to hide it but I'm tired of carrying around the shame.
It's a long story
The TL;DR version of it is simply "life happens, y'know
"
Sometimes things are out of our control, sometimes someone needs a little more time to finish high school
That's how it was for me
I tried at age 16 but I just wasn't ready
Took me a few more years to get well enough to start high school (but for adults)
I graduated this Friday after 3 years of studies.
I'm both happy and thankful that I'm even here today
It's been one heck of a rough road
After so many road blocks followed by seemingly never-ending uphill battles and too many bumps to count, I'm still here today
That's what counts
I'm here and I'm proud of it.
My job
 I'll be an ice cream truck driver
Driving around neighborhoods in a light blue truck loaded with ice cream
Playing a little melody that'll interrupt kids playing in their backyard
Kids asking their parents for some ice cream money
The shyer ones asking if their mom or dad could buy some ice cream for them
Me standing there waiting patiently, with a smile on my face
A smile that could tell an entire life story.
It's just ice cream but it'll be the start of my new life
A big step towards my next life goal - moving out
I love my family but I've been ready for years
I'll be saving up as much as I can, maybe even do some extra work if the manager will let me.
The anxiety is real and I keep worrying about the same things - the change in routines and the new people I'll meet
Having to maneuver a truck that's a bit bigger than the car I'm used to has also been the cause of insomnia
It doesn't matter, though
Everything will work out just fine
Anxiety is real but it's rarely rational.
I'm so happy and I'm so terrified
My next adventure starts in less than 24 hours.
Do you ever feel like you're smart, but you're not *that smart*

I am finishing up my bachelor's degree and trying to get into accredation programs for certain medical jobs, but every program only accepts like ~15 people a year
I know I'm smart, I've kept all my scholarships, but I've had a lot of anxiety about if I'm that smart.
Has anyone else gone for something they haven't felt like they were really qualified for
 How did it go

This breaks my heart.
Yesterday I was babysitting my cousin's kids (5yo, 6yo, 11yo)
At one point in the evening my cousin's 11 year old son showed me a pressure sensitive light he had built out of scraps he found
I was genuinely very impressed with what he'd done, so he showed me the rest of the things he's built
Everything he was showing me was amazing
Granted it was standard circuit board work, but he's an 11 year old kid
 On top of all this, he told me that he'd been working with this sort of stuff since he was 9
 When he saw how amazed I was, all he said was "Thank you, no one else is interested in my stuff." I realized something at that point that hurt my soul: This poor kid is growing up in a society that's more enamoured by people who simply do what's expected of them, instead of being enamoured by those who go above and beyond
The fact that an 11 year old kid is being ignored, despite the fact that he's so much smarter than most kids his age, genuinely breaks my heart
All I can do is hope that his time of recognition comes soon, because this kid absolutely deserves it.
Do you ever get nervous you just aren't a likeable person

I went through a pretty rough break up a few months ago now and ever since then I've just felt disconnected from everyone.
I do try and force myself to socialise but it's just not the same anymore
Anyone been through something similar

How often do you guys use upvotes

When I started reddit I was very select about upvoting things, but now I find myself handing them out like candy at the end of Halloween
What about you

A few days ago, a girl on the bus that I didn't recognize gave me a very warm smile.
More than anything I was puzzled by it, I had no idea why that smile would be directed at me in particular
I even looked behind me to see if there was anyone else she was looking at, despite sitting in a corner
When she got off the bus, we both exchanged big smiles and waves, with me still as puzzled as ever as to why we were doing this
I felt pretty happy afterwards for a while with the thought of someone smiling warmly at a stranger like that
People don't really tend to do that, myself included, even though it has the power to make someone's day the way it made mine.
I saw her on the bus again a couple of days later, and this time she was drawing in a sketchbook, and that's when I realized why she was smiling at me: Nearly a year ago, one of the bookstore clerks at my university had some amazing Kirby art at her counter
While she wasn't there when I was buying books, I made a quick second stop later on to compliment her art in person.
Once I recognized her, I talked to her for a bit, and she told me that the art she was drawing was for an online customer
I didn't talk to her for very long, as she seemed as shy as I was, but I felt happy that her business was getting customers like that.
After the bus ride, I thought to myself: How did she instantly recognize me
 We hadn't seen each other in nearly a year, and I'm too average-looking to stand out in a crowd
I'm a pretty shy person, so I was there for under 15 seconds and barely made eye contact
But, even just the single compliment stuck with her for months.
Tl;dr: Person I didn't recognize on the bus warmly smiled at me, I realized later that it was because I complimented her art months earlier, and that compliment stuck with her to this day
It can seem hard to make a big difference, but if you want a super easy way to make a significant positive difference for someone, whether over the internet or in person, compliment something that they've made.
My year: quit benzodiazepines/opiates, confronted my mental health through weekly therapy and psychiatry appointments, weekly mindfulness and meditation classes, and dieting from 260lb to 215lb
Today I was accepted at a great university after being on a medical leave of absence for several years.
I know the title is wordy but it makes me so proud to see all of those accomplishments in one sentence..
anyway, I was arrested for drug trafficking on my 21st birthday last year and that day I decided to change my life before it was too late
I also had several occasions where my parents found me barely breathing/ unconscious and thought I was dead they said they were pounding on my chest crying
This is what mainly led to me making a change but the arrest was the defined tipping point
 My lawyer(bless him) got the trafficking charge reduced to a disorderly conduct with the condition that it would be expunged from my record if I have no trouble with the police for a year
That time came and went with no trouble because I’m not hanging around sketchy individuals, so that’s off of my record, which allowed me to apply to schools
It’s amazing for me to reflect on this year, I am overcome with emotion and I plan to sustain this lifestyle for the rest of my life
I will never stop striving to better myself and learn more
 I wanted to post this on my birthday, May 5th but I have a hard time talking about myself so I’ve put it off until now
I figured why not, maybe somebody is just starting their journey and could use a little encouragement
I love my life and I’m very happy to be alive and in a good place.
How are you

 I want to hear
Anyone here remember Stumbleupon

just found out they are shutting down today
Even though I haven't used it in years, I'm still kinda sad about it - I found so many cool sites and articles just strolling through that webpage and to this day I've never quite found a website like it.
It really was unique in a way and it's a shame they are shutting down

PS: If anyone knows of a way to save all your likes on your profile, that would be amazing
I've got over 1.1K and bookmarking every single one is not possible :p
After five years, I quit my toxic restaurant job today.
I’ve been a server in a corporate chain restaurant for five years, and over time every last ounce of positivity has been sucked from my soul
I started being tired all the time, avoiding social events with friends, stopped working out, even started hating all my customers before I greeted them
I stuck around because I had a couple really good friends I worked with and they always helped to keep me thinking positively and even sometimes made work fun, but one left a few months ago and my other friends are as burnt out as I am
I don’t know why it took me this long, but today’s Fourth of July shift really pushed me over the edge
I sat down before work today and wrote your typical resignation letter
Upon turning it in, I felt as though a semi truck had been lifted from my shoulders.
For the first time in a while, I’m looking forward to the future
I’m ready to go back to the happy go lucky person I was before the service industry.
Happy Fourth of July everyone, I hope it was great.
I sometimes feel bad for the comments that are downvoted for no real reason, so I upvote them to make their day a little better
I know they probably never notice, and it's kinda silly to like a comment just because you feel bad for them, but I just hope that when people see their comment go from -1 to 0 it makes their day just a little bit better
Does anyone else do this

My parents are finally supporting my hobbies.
Ever since my brother was a young kid he was into sports
Baseball, basketball, golf--he had phases in almost everything, but these three mainly
So my parents bought him top of the line baseball bats, golf clubs, shoes, and put him in every league you could imagine
He's 20 now and for Christmas, his gift is always a week long trip across the country to golf.
My hobby since the tender age of ten
 Fishkeeping
I love this hobby and it's been nearly constant for over ten years
I've had multiple tanks (that I've paid for), I've bred various types of fish, I'm on all the online fish forums
It's my favorite thing in the world
They keep me alive sometimes, having to take care of a fragile ecosystem.
Only thing is, my parents always HATED it
When I'd ask for a tank for Christmas
 An eye roll
When I'd excitedly tell them I finally managed to breed a species of catfish I'd never bred before
 Don't give a shit.
Lately my mom has taken a liking to my angelfish
I'm not sure why, she's never cared about any of my fish before, but she's into them
Cool
 Yet last Christmas I asked for a bigger tank for them
Nope
It's not a space problem, it's not a money problem--it's just they didn't care
Which, to an extent is fine I guess, but I expect a little more from people who've been to every single golf, basketball and baseball game for my brother and spend thousands to get him the right golf clubs.
I brought this up to my mom
Nicely
Just said "it isn't really fair that we give brother anything sports related, but when it comes to my hobby I'm not even allowed to do much."
And immediately she apologized and promised for my birthday I get a bigger tank
 All paid for (which I did t expect at all
I expected she'd only let me use my own money to buy a larger tank, but she agreed that they support my brother's hobbies--why can't they support mine
)
I am SO excited for this

I love Wikipedia
It's not without problems, but I feel like we take for granted what is one of the wonders of the modern world.
You can casually read up on stuff, or do a real deep dive and check sources, find new ones and make edits.
I've been a total addict since 2005 and probably average out at several visits a day.
I'm sorry to see that it is blocked in Turkey
This is sad, and ridiuculous.
This comment has info on how to bypass it if you need to: https://www.reddit.com/r/CasualConversation/comments/8xb2i0/i_love_wikipedia/e22svxr/
So..
I've been a Redditor for 10 years now today.
I've literally visited this site nearly every day for the past 10 years.
Also: I am a woman
I am black woman
I am a middle aged black woman
In all these years I can count on one hand the number of times I've revealed all three of these at once
Revealing each one individually already has the propensity to bring the worst Redditors to the table
I can't begin to tell you the names I've been called or the hurtful stereotypes I was expected to defend or debate because I revealed my gender, race or age over the past decade on Reddit.
But I never engage with those seeking to attack or debate due to the reveal..as wasting my time fighting a faceless battle on the internet with some jackwagon that feels powerful because they are able to hide behind their keyboard is pretty stupid to me

But don't get me wrong.
the past decade on Reddit hasn't been all bad
Not way
 I developed a phenomenal friendship offline with a Redditor in my city after selling concert tickets to her .
she's now one of my dearest friends.
Also, I live in this city without my family
Several years ago I found myself in an abusive relationship during a pretty low, lonely and emotionally trying period of my life
I was an emotional zombie due to the sudden death of my mother and the professional struggles I encountered while trying to stabilize myself professionally and assimilate to a (less diverse) new city where I knew no one
After many doors being slammed in my face professionally, being alone, I gave up on myself and invited the wrong man into my life, putting myself in a worse situation.
Long story short.
Something in me finally clicked and I gained the strength to walk out
(The previous week, I'd been in the hospital as I'd "fallen" down a flight of stairs)
The firefighters that showed up knew something was wrong but I was afraid to tell them what was going on and what had happened
Yeah, he pushed me.
But on this night, I grabbed my little dog, my car keys and my wallet..got into my car and sped away
I had no plan
For some reason, that night I posted on Reddit..scared, tired, confused, emotionally drained and broken
Several Redditors in my area came to my rescue..both men and women, offering me lodging for the night, to come and meet me for coffee, numbers to community resources and more, so much help
I rented a room at a Motel 6.
and met a Redditor for coffee, she chatted with me until the sun came up and continued to check in on me the following day
I moved one week later into the very comfortable home of friend of hers that needed a roommate
I had no job at the time, I was on unemployment and had a severance from the company that had laid me off previously (that was quickly dwindling as I'd turned to alcohol after my mothers death).
I'm about to turn 60, and I still feel like I did at 25
I keep hearing about "adulting" and how hard it is
Well, it is hard and doesn't get easier.
At almost 60, I still get scared, overwhelmed and don't know what to do sometimes
I still have sleepless nights and wonder what the hell I'm going to do about some situations
The difference is I can use my experience in prior situations to assess the current one
Or, even better, I have a circle of family/friends/professionals that I can go to for advice
Ones that I trust, not the one on the next barstool or such.
But inside, I still feel like I'm 25
 I like splashing in puddles, I sit in awe of a star-filled sky, I blow bubbles even when I'm not with the grandkids
I love shopping for new and different clothes in out of the way places, I still travel alone to places that interest me
I love to cook and try new things
I stay out late and sleep in sometimes, just not every weekend lol
 I take up new hobbies and endeavors because they seem interesting
I still reach out to strangers and make new friends, so that I don't get bored
And I LOVE a good whisky and the occasional drunk

Everyone thinks  there is a magic age when you feel mature
It's not true
As you get older you get  more responsible and you learn how to deal with difficult things because you've learned
You've learned consequences of being irresponsible suck, you've learned to deal with difficult things because NOT dealing with them is more harsh in the long run.
Yeah, 'adulting' is hard and not fun plenty of times
But being irreverant, immature and irresponsible is a lot harder, a lot harsher and very damaging
It makes a happy life just about impossible.
All told, I'm very happy to be looking at my 60th birthday coming up
 I've had a wonderful and interesting life full of amazing people and places
I've worked extremely hard to get where I am in life and I am enjoying every minute of it

My children are grown and I now have the time AND the money to do just about anything that interests or intrigues me
I am not wealthy, I am comfortable.
But that didn't happen magically, nor was it inherited or handed to me
It took planning and diligence
At times, it took a great deal of sacrifice and pain
During the recession I almost lost everything and I lived in a lot of fear during that time
 But I had already learned how to handle things
 It took learning to know what was a need vs want, it took learning to save and learning to invest
 I could have a fancy new car, or I could take that money and do something smart with it and settle for a really decent car
 I could rack up credit card debt that would take ten years to pay back for a trip to Europe for a month, or I could travel when I could afford it, make the trips smaller, and use hostels, mid range hotels, campgrounds, etc
There is no need to go dirt cheap unless you need to, but no need to create debt, for the same reason
So, in spite of the recession, I survived those tough financial times because I wasn't carrying massive debt for fancy, expensive wants
So I could focus my financial survival on what was within my means.
I've had fabulous experiences and travels and memories
I wouldn't trade it for anything
 Life has been good to me, but it didn't happen without me preparing for it to be so
I've had some extreme difficulties, some serious challenges and a lot of tragedy in my life too, so it hasn't been sunshine and roses
Life never is
But it didn't make me lose focus, it didn't take me to the bottom, and it didn't cause me to burn bridges
I went through all of them, from the death of one child, through the mental health issues of another, and came out the other end a different person, but still one who finds a great deal of joy in life, rather than wallowing in the dark side of it.
I hope everyone feels this way when looking at their older years

Met a pretty woman at a dog park
A few days later she was there again
That night I installed a dating app and she was the first person it recommended to me.
Kind of weird how that worked out, I thought
So I messaged her and told her about it and she gave me her number.
For clarification, the app is Plenty of Fish
I went to my "ultra match" list and she was number one.
Anyone need advice from an old man

I've finally got my own life dialed in
I retired last year (at 54)
I have no debt, no bills, and nothing but time
I should also add that I have a diverse background and a 1/2 century of experience
How can I help

Today I learned that you eat popcorn microwaved....
I know this is going to sound stupid, but I am actually shook right now
I am not an idiot, I've always gotten A's and B's in school, I have a job, and I generally understand how the world works and can pick up on new things quickly.
I played a lot of baseball when I was younger and one thing baseball players like to eat a lot of is sunflower seeds
Sunflower seeds are just seeds you toss into your mouth and eat
Typically, you wouldn't think to eat a seed, but with Sunflower seeds it was totally regular and that's just the way you'd do it.
I always thought popcorn was the same way
You want something to chew on
 You rip open a bag of popcorn and either chew them, swallow them whole, or spit them out after chewing them for a bit
That is how I had eaten popcorn the most of my lift, and nobody has corrected me.
I know what you are thinking
How did you not realise earlier
 Did you never go to the movies
 I always knew popcorn was associated with the movies, but I thought it was just something you chewed on during the film, after all, who wants to be looking down during a film
It also didn't help that the box we purchased popcorn from didn't show the popped product on it, so I never knew what it was supposed to be like.
I always hated popcorn growing up
My parents asked me if I wanted popcorn when we went to movies, and I would always say no, because who wants to chew on that shit during a movie
 I would chew a bag maybe once a month, but never any more than that, as I wasn't a big fan.
So how did I find out
 Well recently, I had purchased a different brand of popcorn
This brand actually had the popped corn on the side of the box, which confused me
I got home, ripped open a bag, and started chewing
But then, as I was chewing, I started reading the bag, more specifically, the instructions
As I read the instructions, I immediately spit out my kernals and tried making another bag, popped, in the microwave oven
I didn't think it was going to work
I heard a pop, and immediately opened the microwave, as I didn't think that was good
(I know it sounds stupid, but bear with me)
I then put it back and let the kernels all pop
The total microwave time was 2:15
Then, I opened the bag to some yellowish popped kernels
They tasted soft and hard but melted in your mouth all chewy and buttery
It was so good, I finished the bag and immediately microwaved another
I can say without a doubt that this is now my favorite food, and I love it
I always thought you chewed the hard kernels, but now I know you eat it microwaved
I know this story sounds made up, but it is 100% real
If you want to ask questions or recommend other types of popcorn, please comment

Thanks for gold
Glad y'all enjoy my story
A learning experience for me, and will be a great story to tell my future children.
I will also compile all reasonable suggestions into a list and will try them all and make a followup post if y'all would like that.
Does anyone else start typing a comment on reddit then halfway through end up discarding it and not bothering, almost every time

I do this almost every time I start writing a comment
As if I just end up feeling like it’s not worth it or something
I literally almost did it with this post, lol.
After sending out well over 1000 resumes in the last 3 years I finally have an interview

I’m a petroleum engineer that’s been out of the field since 2015
 I’ve applied to every job that I’m qualified for and many that are above my experience level
 I’ve been working other jobs that I don’t hate but I’m not passionate about since I was laid off (economic downturn of oil)
 I finally got an email today for an interview for a position that is my ideal job, I’m perfectly qualified and have a little more than what they’re asking for
 I’m not going to lie, it made me cry just to finally have a company not send me a rejection
 I just wanted to share with everyone that’s going through tough times that the good times can be just around the corner, don’t give up
 I haven’t gotten the job yet but it just feels right.
I learned about "TL;DR" from reddit and used it in a really long work email, now everyone in the company is doing it too.
A couple weeks ago, I had to send a super long email to our president explaining a situation that happened at work
It was super thorough and had lots of attachments and numbers and other boring stuff
He's a super busy dude and assuming he wanted to know what happened and involve who he need to who would review the finer points, so I added a "TL;DR" and put the quick, two-sentence synopsis at the end.
A couple hours go by and he calls me and ask what the heck "tillder" means
I explained that because the email was so long, I added the short "too long; didn't read" for him so he'd get the picture without having to read the entire narrative
He thought it was awesome and ended up forwarding the email to the entire company explaining "tillder" and now everyone is using it.
TL;DR: I sent the company president an email with "TL;DR" in it and he thought it was cool and now everyone else uses it.
Making friends as an adult is hard.
Just turned 28 and fuck me...
I honestly have only 3 friends I ever see..
It's once a fortnight and only for dnd.
I don't actually have any friends I can call and be like "Hey, wanna hang out
".
I used to have friends like that but they all moved away and live at other ends of the country
I still see them from time to time once, maybe twice a year.
But day-to-day or week-to-week I just don't really have anyone and I feel so lonely all the time.
No one told me that having friends as an adult would be this hard or that not having them would hurt so much.
Son’s dance lessons.
So small back story, I’m 6ft, shaved head, tattoos, stubble beard, bit grumpy and most importantly I have a nearly 6 year old boy.
So for a few weeks now my son has been doing this weird dance thing where he wiggles his hips and swings his arms and basically looks like a bit of a sausage so I asked him about it and he said he was trying to do “the floss” because all of his friends could do it.
At first being the rather grumpy man that I am I told him to pack it in and used some old cliche about not following a crowd off a cliff like my dad would have said to me
Then I paused for thought for a second and realised how important it was to him to impress his friends and well let’s just say I then spent a rather long morning watching YouTube and dancing about like an idiot in front of the mirror and now I can do the floss and after about 10 minutes of showing him what to do, so can he.
We look like idiots but I’ve never seen him happier.
A real life love story
Back in 8th grade (8 years ago) I had a crush on a boy
He started dating another girl in my class and I was absolutely heart broken...well, as heart broken as a 13-year-old can be.
She came from a strict family and when they found out about him, they forbade her from seeing him
She was too young and needed to focus on school, not boys.
I remember feeling a sick sort of happiness at the fact that they couldn't be together
Selfish, I know
But 13-year-olds aren't known for their emotional stability and selflessness.
Time went on, I outgrew my crush, became friends with the girl
The two of them remained friends through high school and even tried dating again when they were 17
Again, her parents found out and threatened to send her to boarding school if she didn't break up with him and focus on her studies.
She broke up with him again and they couldn't even stand to be in the same room as each other
We all graduated high school, moved on with our lives
We all parted ways and I lost touch with both of them.
One of them popped up on my "friends you may know" on Facebook and I decided to check it out
They just got married yesterday and I'm so incredibly happy for them
I know they've gone through so much to be where they are today and I'm so glad they can finally have that happiness together.
I am in so much pain and it makes me happy
My whole life I've been fat, but I have only recently come to the realisation that I am fat AND extremely unfit
I'm only 18 years old and yet I get puffed out at the smallest tasks, have chest pains and am already shopping in the plus size sections.
I did something good though
I enrolled in a fitness program and bought the right kind of food to begin changing my diet
I don't think I've exercised in roughly 1 and 1/2 years
My lifestyle did not require me to do much physical activity and I never did it on my own
In the first class I had we started off with some stretching which included lunges, and boy let me tell you I had basically forgotten I had muscles right up until I took that first lunge
It stretched like it had never stretched before
Today was my second training session and my thighs and arms are extremely sore
Like it-hurts-to-exist kinda sore.
I'm in pain but it makes me feel good
It reminds me that I'm finally doing something about myself
I've been unhappy with my body my whole life, and I knew deep down I'm the only one that can change that but I always had my doubts, fears and excuses that prolonged it
I feel like the pain is my bodys way of saying 'Thank you, it'll get better'
It hurts but in a good way.
P.S
I find it amazing how to my beloved family I just tell them yeah I'm sore from training but to a bunch of strangers on the internet I pour my emotions out lmao
A coworker just discovered my previous Reddit username and I had to delete my account
I was in the five-year club
And not I'm starting afresh.
It was such a silly mistake
A post she knew I shared because it was content we'd created together.
I didn't delete my account because I had weird stuff on there that I was ashamed of
I just loved the privacy of it
I'm not on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter or any of the other public social media forums
I just don't like the experience of them
But over the years, I've come to see Reddit as my safe-anonymous-space
I love that I can talk to people without the pressure of who I am coloring the conversation
On Reddit, I'm only as smart or stupid, funny or mean, and silly or insightful as the comment that I'm writing.
I'd gotten 13k karma in the five years that the account existed in posts and comments
It was never a landslide of upvotes, just a few here and there
I liked it that way, though
I liked the smaller, niche, tight-knit subreddits where I usually posted—there weren't too many people at a time but the ones that were around wanted to be there and cared about the community.
I guess I'm writing this because I feel weird
I don't care about fake internet points...so why am I upset my account is gone
 Maybe it's the longevity of it all
Five years that have seen me through different continents, professions, and mindsets
It feels like I'm starting afresh in more ways that one
Even though my old account has only been gone five minutes.
I didn't realise how clearly you can see leaves on trees
I've needed glasses since I was 14ish
My eyes have rapidly become worse and I didn't help by hating wearing them unless I was in lectures or classes
I'm nearly 20 and finally paid for another eye test and received contacts
Holy shit you can see leaves on trees

 like individual fucking leaves

 It's not one big green blur I'm amazed I want to go on a hike
My son saw a sign that said 'please keep children under supervision' and asked "dad, have you got super vision
"
I never thought of the word 'supervision' that way before.
Even though it's probably just a derivative of the word 'supervise', my son's innocent question made me think of it a different way
Don't just keep your kids under your vision, keep them under SUPER vision.
My boyfriend doesn't have cancer

I don't know if this is the right place to post this but I'm so happy that I could cry.
For months we've been told that my boyfriend of 3 years most likely had lymphoma due to issues in his lymph nodes
We were prepared to lose him.
We got a call today saying it's not cancer, it's just a really bad infection that's been lying dormant
It can be fixed with strong antibiotics
He's going to be fine.
I spent so much time worrying, crying, and praying for him
I've stressed myself out to the max wondering what we were doing to do
And now it's alright
Everything is okay.
He's okay.
I believe in a higher power and I truly feel as if my prayers were answered.
I don't really know what else to say, I'm just so happy right.
what good news have you gotten recently
 What's made you happy today

My Guinea pig just did a running jump onto my lap for the first time
I feel so happy
 Pretty sure she only did it because she knows that’s a sure way to get a treat but still
I’m so happy
 My piggies didn’t have a very nice start to life and it feels great that they starting to trust me at least a little bit
One definitely more so than the other
No idea why
For some reason she seems to have become more trusting of me after she had her babies recently.
One comes willingly to my lap
Just need to win over the other one now...
Anyone have any Guinea pig stories or tips

I met someone on reddit

If she wants to identify herself in the comments, she can
I posted in r4r to make a friend but i get nervous about meeting strangers.
As an adult, and autistic, its been hard for me to make friends or find people to talk to
We kind of waxed poetic on that
We also found out we live very close to eachother
She works next door to the building im working in
Weve spoken for a week or so on discord and then i finally stopped where she works after work.
It was really nervewracking and i was worried id look weird but i smiled at her when i walked in She smiled back but she gets paid to do that.
She works in the service industry so i went and made my related request and she looked like she recognized me
It felt like we dodged it for a min and then she said, "im sorry you look familiar
"
i said, "i am familiar
"
It was such a neat little meeting and she was really good at her job

I'm 33 and today is my first day of college.
I'm terrified
The entire process of just registering has given me severe anxiety
I did well enough on my placement testing that my first math class is accelerated algebra
I never had good grades in HS, especially math, albeit was never for a lack of intelligence
I was 30 before I was diagnosed with ADHD and ever since that things have made a lot more sense
Even after the "diagnosis" I was always one of those skeptical ones about ADHD even being a thing because I was fairly ignorant to it in the past (Hi Mom/Dad)
But now that I've see how effective treatment can be, it only upsets me that I or my parents didn't understand it when I was younger
Maybe I wouldn't have waited 15 years after HS to go to college
 Shrug
Better late than never.
Whisper sweet nothings in my ears and tell me that my anxiety is irrational :)
Been redditing for a little while now - I just have to say I love the odd juxtaposition of total immaturity and grownup stuff.
Heavy emotional content by someone with the username ballsucker69..
financial advice from peedinyourcheerios99
Just wanted to say I enjoy this
When i was a teenager, signing up for Facebook made me feel like an adult for some reason
Now that i am an adult, choosing to delete my Facebook makes me feel even more grown up
I can't stop reliving the moment in my head
We woke up on her bed, and she was rubbing her nose on my face and making all these faces at me, which made me laugh and realize how in love with her I was
I guess I didn't say anything for a while, so she asked me what's up and all I could say was, "I think I'm in love with you." We both froze for a few seconds, but then she smiled and said she loved me too and now I just have a warm, fuzzy feeling in my heart
This is so amazing

I’ve created a list of more than 200 interesting questions
Comment a number and I’ll ask you one

Hi CC
 I love having conversations with people and asking questions that can reveal a lot about them
I have 225 questions and the list is growing all the time
I’d love to ask you all some

Am I the only one who search for answers on Google but added Reddit at the end of the question to see if anyone one shares the same problem

So after reading so many advises, stuffs, knowledge on Reddit
I have the habit of adding "Reddit" at every end of my questions to see if anyone has the same problem as me.
I can't be the only one right

50th blood donation
Been a long-term, low-key goal for me.
So yeah, been donating since I was allowed to at 16
Missed a few because of random malaria malarky, but not too many
Just finished my 50th donation.
Worthwhile, in general, if only for the warm fuzzies.
Anyone else randomly lose their sense of reality

I find myself overthinking a simple subject until I cannot comprehend the subject anymore
The best way I can really describe it is through an example.
Earlier today I was having a normal conversation with my SO (significant other) about what we wanted to eat today
Very normal conversation..but after she had walked off I started wondering what that conversation was like in her head
What do I look like to her
 What is the first thing she looks at when she turns to me
 The thought of seeing myself outside my body as if I was another person just made me forget reality for just that second
Other examples include technology and other variants of that
I sit here trying to understand the process of how voices and instruments can go from being played live, to a carved disk and a needle, to a link I clicked on.
man it makes me trip out and I just don’t feel real if I think on it too long.
..I think this might be related to staring at a word for so long it looks fake.
Anyway, how do you guys lose your sense of reality

I’ve seen about a quarter of the comments referring to this as Derealization or Depersonalization:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derealization
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depersonalization
And I just want to thank everyone who did bring that to my attention
I had no idea so many people have gone through the same thing
I’ve seen some comments referring to a point in their life where this was happening frequently but has changed over a period of time
It’s definitely amazing to see how different but similar your experiences are.
Did anyone else stalk Reddit for a few years before making an account

I was a Reddit stalker for what feels like a long time before I decided to make an account
 I guess I was afraid to make posts/comments or something since I have social anxiety
 I still have social anxiety mostly in public, but, I feel like I can almost talk freely like a normal person online now
And having positive interactions on here makes me happy now
 It is a weird feeling for me lol.
I heard the most ridiculous pickup line today and yet I haven't stopped laughing for five minutes.
It's this:
Are you a whale

Cause we can hump back at my place.
Look, I'm not a native English speaker and I've never heard this before
I can't
I'm still so delighted and keep snorting every five seconds.
What's your favourite cheesy pickup line that you've heard or use
 And did it work

(Also
Humpback..
whale..
What is that name..
the joke took me so long to understand because I didn't know the animal name..
now I'm dying and loving it.)
I held someone's hand today.
Was hanging out with some female friend, got distracted with my phone and felt her squeezing my hands and let go
Out of instinct I grabbed her hand back seconds later just to feel her suddenly stopped walking
Turned out I just grabbed a random middle aged lady's hand in what must have looked like the worst kidnapping attempt ever
Good thing she just decided to act like nothing happened and walked to another direction, leaving me wanting to chop my arm off and my friend losing it.
Another lovely story to cringe to myself before bed time.
I helped my company secure a multimillion dollar account...and I have my love of zombie movies to thank for it.
Background; I work in the shipping industry and my job is primarily focused on dealing with hazardous materials, international shipments; and most importantly preventing and habdling damaged product.
I have been on the warehouse floor for 10 years and have done a little bit of everything
One day our sales rep asked me if I would be willing to share my knowledge with potential clients who come in to see the facility
I was encouraged to discuss my history with damaged goods, how we do the process, the % of damages versus how many packages go through us, and our equipment.
Well I was getting very good at answering questions and explaining all the processes
When we got a new group in to check out the warehouse, our salea rep brought them over per usual to me at the end.
One of their leads started asking me a lot more questions than the norm
How we handle packages whose labels got removed, how we handle product that fell out of a box; etc and etc.
I nailed all the questions and ended it with "We have a process and plan for practically any problem..."
To which the guy responded; "And what if there is a zombie outbreak
"
Now I love zombie flicks and am a huge horror nut to begin with
One of my favorite "bored" past times was to make up zombie apocalypse survival plans in my head or with other friends at work
We always joked how we would use the warehouse as a bunker.
As such; i switchdd immediately from Professional Mode to Geek mode and without missing a beat i responded;
"Well our walls are 14 feet high and surround the entire facility
Reinforced with rebar and steel to prevent any break downs
We only have one gate in and out for drivers
All we need is to take the trailer off its frame and drop it before the gate to secure it.
We have an on site gas station that we can use for any fueling needs including the several generators we keep for backup
Once secure we take inventory of all the shipments we have which will most likely include food ammo and other necessities
We have roof access to monitor the surrounding areas and our catwalks allow easy scouting off the ground floor inside
All rooms can be locked and oir security footage can handle our blind spots."
People are so scared of making eye contact with strangers but I love it.
Today I had been in a subway car for a bit and the guy sitting across from me had been there for about the same time as me
He was clearly thinking to himself, I saw him shake his head a few times
I had been too, and once my thought trailed off I happened to look up in his direction and he happened to do the same
Usually people break eye contact with me pretty quickly, but this time we both held our gaze for a few seconds, realized what we were both doing, and then just gave each other the most genuine grins
We broke eye contact then but before he got off we smiled at each other and waved and he told me to take care as he left the train
I’ve always been one to make eye contact when I’m walking in the street or in the subway like that and most people I talk to about it think I’m crazy for doing that
But I live for moments like that, it sticks with me and makes everything feel more human, yknow

I’ve been in a bit of a dark place this week and that small moment made my entire day so much better
Just wanted to share, much love to anyone who took the time to read this :)
Anyone else wish it was more socially acceptable to run to places just be cause it's quicker

Need to get to class all the way across campus
 You will be there in half the time if you run there
 Excited that you finally got off work and can't wait to go home
 Running to your car will get you there even quicker
 Or just in general you don't like wasting time
 Running everywhere would save so much time over long lengths of time.
I Just Passed My Driving Test

I’m so happy



I don’t know who to tell but this is the best I’ve felt in years



Thanks to anyone who sees this, just wanted to share it :)
Another edit - Thanks for all the comments guys, I didn’t realise so many people would be happy for a random stranger on the internet
Cheers for the messages, they were heartwarming and made me feel even better than I did before
All you taking your test soon, I’m sure you’ll pass and I have all the confidence in the world in you guys/gals
I’ll still try replying to comments but I’ll have to do it when I wake up
You guys are the best :)
I've always secretly felt like I was in second place, not quite good enough
Until last night.
I'm 37 and single
I don't have any kids
My sister has a husband and 4 beautiful children
I've always thought it was my responsibility to be there for her, to help wherever I could
"It takes a village" is more than just a motto to me
I help watch the kids, be there financially or emotionally, or whatever is needed
That's just what family does
The kids come spend time at Aunt Lisa's house, hang out, play games, whatever
A few times a week I come over for dinner
I'm at all the soccer games, concerts, fund raisers, or school fairs
They're just part of my life
My sister tells me regularly that she couldn't do it without me
She's super grateful
But still, inside, I've never felt like I was on the same level as her
Like I didn't live up to what I could have been - a wife and mom - so this is the consolation prize
This is my second best place I could help the world
Until last night.
We were talking about Thanksgiving, having it at her place (obviously, since she has so many more people and more room)
She said it was weird to think that in 20 years she would have grandkids
If each of the kids were married and had just 2 kids each, that would be another 12 people
She's just always made the assumption that would happen
But then for the first time ever she said - "but that's if they all choose to get married
If not, that's fine
If one of them doesn't, the others would have their own Aunt Lisa, and that's awesome."
Hearing that she thought that was ok for her kids made it all different
Being single and a helper wasn't just a second place fill-in, but an appreciated, important status
It made me feel valued, and I knew that my nieces and nephews would feel valued, no matter what their future holds.
My mom is currently going off on my dad in Spanish
He bought and smoked/is smoking 200 slabs of ribs and a new smoker
It’s hilarious
My dad always goes way overboard with shit like this.
We’re supposed to invite a few neighbors and friends over to eat BBQ tonight
This would be like 50 people including kids and babies AT MOST
Dad apparently spent $3800 on the extra smoker, pans, seasonings, and the ribs themselves.
He’s like a puppy who peed on the carpet because he knows this was stupid but he’s in too deep now and has to finish cooking the ribs
It’s hilarious because he has this embarrassed little smile on his face and my mother is storming through the house going off on him in Spanish.
There’s so many ribs I can’t stop laughing
Now he keeps saying he’ll load up the truck and give them to hungry homeless people but my mom knows he’s trying to get in her good graces so she said, “that wasn’t your original plan
” And stormed off again 😂😂
My dad has a history of doing this
He got into woodworking a few years ago and currently has like 20 or so projects at various stages of completion.
I went out to his shop one day a few months back and he was surrounded by sawdust and wood and half done projects
At first it was just quiet because I was surprised at the mess and then he said, “I may have gone overboard with woodworking.”
I love my dad he’s so lovably oafish with certain things.
11 months sober from alcohol and weed
Just realized today marks 11 months sober and two months of drinking nothing but water
No soda or smoothies, nothing
Cant believe how great I feel every day
Who know that if you take care of your body you'll feel better

One year will be a piece of cake.
I gave a guy CPR today
A man collapsed on the train I was travelling to school on this morning
When it happened he was about 10ft away from me
He just slumped onto the floor, and everyone else on the train just stood and looked but took no action
I remembered what I'd read about the bystander effect on Reddit and decided I needed to be the person to act, so I told a woman to call an ambulance and went over to the man on the floor.
He was wearing 5-6 coats (so I am assuming he was homeless) so I ripped them off and tried to find a pulse
After about 30 seconds another woman came over who said she was a nurse and she began talking to the paramedic on the phone while I tried to get a pulse
Couldn't find one so I began chest compressions and not long after the man started to groan and it seemed like he was breathing again
After it was confirmed he was breathing (but was still unconscious) the nurse and I put him in the recovery position and I waited with him till the ambulance came.
I'm only 17 so this was a pretty crazy experience for me
The adrenaline in my body afterwards was so strong I felt like I was on drugs
Sorry if this post was long or formatted badly (I'm on mobile) but I just thought it would be good to write about my experience.
Someone told me that I was "hot" today
After spending almost an year trying to get myself together after a really bad breakup, I have started dating again
So, today this girl I am seeing told me that I was really "hot"
It's kind of threw me off because as a guy, I am not really used to getting such direct compliments and I thought nobody would ever find me attractive after my ex.
We are seeing each other again soon
I don't know who else to tell this.
Met up with a Redditor for a beer
Didn't get raped or murdered
Win.
Posted here and other places about me before
I am a somewhat one off human being
Am a 35yo, white, male, disabled little person living in Philly, PA, USA
First year in my own apt, after having lived 34 years in near total isolation with mentally abusive parents (mainly mother) in a completely inaccessible house even for the simplest of things
Depression was and still is a big part of life, and so are other physical ailments as you can imagine
Life was never easy and was made severely worse most of the time by my own mother, throwing tantrums, stealing, demeaning, name calling, screaming, etc
Loathing.
I somehow made it out of that shithole and have my own subsidized accessible apt
Life is different but I am on my own
Obviously hard financially but I figure I am paying for my piece of mind
They don't get to ruin my life anymore
I have a very good visiting aide who I think I am lucky to have met, in a sea of terrible or mediocre aides
She has very similar tastes in most things to me, and understands my way of life on a deeper level that most humans I've met before
Only one who really got me was my dog and she died a couple months before I moved out
I am Jack's sense of nostalgia.
I made a thread on r/ama a few days ago, it got upvoted quite a bit and a couple people messaged me about just getting a beer together
This is supremely out of the ordinary for me, but I actually met up with a dude in a bar across the street and got a burger and just sat for an hr or so
Pretty happy I didn't get whacked on the head or anything, but then again I have nothing to steal
Not even gold fillings
Heh
Mummy dearest would absolutely die if she knew I met a rando offline
Hm
Maybe I should tell her about it

Discuss.
I'm adopting two cats tomorrow



Last night they visited my apartment and gave the final confirmation I was approved
I'm buying all the cat stuff today, and tomorrow they'll be bringing around the two little furballs &lt;3
I've never had a pet but have wanted to adopt cats for just about all my life
I'm so, so, so dang excited 



If you have cats, tell me about yours
 Or do you have any random tips for taking care of these two
(they're 6 months and 2 years old, with the little one being very skittish and also very likely to need 1-2 months to get used to and trust me)
Reddit in general, I love you guys.
I'm honestly a sorta lonely 27 year old dude
I live in a tiny terrible studio apartment, but despite that description I am quite comfy in my little 'cave' it's cozy and I feel safe and am happy
It's got enough room that I was able to adopt a wee puppy dog, who I love
Her name is ViVi.
Anyway
I'm rambling.
I haven't been able to make any lasting friendships or connections
I wouldn't say there is anything wrong me, I just haven't found the people who both have the time, and want to invest it in social time with me
It's no one's fault, so I'm not bitter
Just a bit sad.
And I come on here, and I can talk about all my favourite things, I've been to the front a few times and felt flattered and validated.
I can browse the front page and be informed about the world in a way that feels like I'm talking to friends around a table
Rather than researching it all on my own.
I love you guys, and when things get better for me, I'll still love you
♥️
What's a niche subreddit you all enjoy

Queens GIANT hit "Bohemian Rhapsody" came out in 1977 and to this day is considered a banger
I wonder what current song will be still getting played in 41 years time that gets everyone as excited as Bohemian Rhapsody.
Not a huge fan of the majority of music that is coming out now days and seems to be the new "biggest hit"
Just thinking, I cannot actually think of 1 song that is current and will have the same sort of reaction when it is played in 41 years time like Bohemian does

Anyone else that loves being up early

So it’s the coziest morning ever
We have a guest over, a friend of my husband
He’s fast asleep
My husband is too
I’m up baking sourdough bread and swedish christmas buns with saffron (lussebullar)
Everything is dead quiet, it’s pitch black outside
I just heard the neighbours icelandic horses whinnying, but the falling snow mutes all sounds
The time is 7:16 here and I feel like I’m the only one left alive  on earth
I might be a bit hungover, but just enough to make me calm
I’m gonna give those guys a wonderful breakfast
Maybe I’ll even churn some butter, as I used to work at a artisanal dairy.
The kitchen smells wonderful and it will be at least an hour before anyone wakes up
This is my favourite part of the day.
Do you ever drive in the highway for a few hours and another car is in front or behind you going the same speed and when you or they finally go through an exit, you're just like "So long, partner"

I drive 2 hours in the highway every few weeks and whenever I drive, there is always a car that I follow or they follow me and we never pass each other
When they finally go through an exit or I do, it feels like I just made a friend and makes me sad
Don't know if anyone does this or if it's just me.
Today, after 2 years of university, I finally managed to gather the courage to ask a question in class :)
I thought about the question and formulated it in my mind for like 15 minutes before I even dared ask it, and my heart was pounding like crazy even just at the darn thought of raising my hand (I hadn't even spoken yet and my anxiety was kicking in).
But I did it

I raised my arm and asked the professor a question.
Apple saved my wife’s life.
Recently, Apple released an update for their new Apple Watch
It enable ECG and people could start taking tests.
I let my wife try it on and it kept giving us alerts and telling us to see a doctor soon
We did multiple tests to see if it was true.
We rushed over to the emergency room and told them about the results and they sent us straight in and past the line.
The doctor said that if we didn’t come in, my wife could’ve been having a heart attack in a week.
Now a few days later, everything is starting to stabilize
We have been taking it easy and are grateful for Apple and the doctors that helped us.
(EDIT) This is literally a couple of minutes after I posted this but Apple has reached out to us and they want to have us be in one of their upcoming apple commercials promoting the ecg feature on the watch
This has all been a long emotional rollercoaster and we are super overwhelmed.
I just quit my job.
I just quit my shitty restaurant job
It was actually quite well paid, but the owners were dicks who threatened to remove hours and fire me all the time, so this time I just told them I am not coming this weekend, and I quit
Feels good man
 Gonna go snowboarding now to relax :)
To all those working over the holidays so the rest of us can have time off with our families, THANK YOU

For many years I worked on the holidays
This year, I’m spending it with my family, and I’m eternally  grateful to those working at the hotel, rental car agency, restaurants, etc
so I can relax and enjoy the time off
Thanks so very much

To everyone else who is also alone on Christmas eve / Christmas day , it's ok
It's better than being with people who don't love you
We are strong and awesome and we can have a great time on our own 

I know it's a bit late but to anyone else who is also spending Christmas alone , you are awesome
 I just wanted to say you guys are all awesome and kind and amazing people and if you couldn't be with your family or your friends are away  ( like me ) and the one you love isn't with you  (in my case don't ask ) or whatever reason, you can still have a good time
Pour yourself a glass and toast to an awesome you 

I just received the most amazing Christmas miracle
A special needs boy who looked a little older than me (I’m 23) came up to me in the store parking lot asking how my Christmas was
I was in a hurry (and a bad mood because of family issues) but I already saw 4 people ignore him and I just couldn’t do that(I wouldn’t have any way) So I stood and talked with him for a few minutes
He asked how my Christmas was and if it went good and I said yes and he said “are you sure
 I think it could be better for you” and I laughed and said I guess it could always be better lol
He then gave me the biggest hug I’ve ever had and said “hold on wait right here, I have something for you” and he ran to his parents (maybe grandparents) car and came back with a bag full of candy
I was super excited
It tickled me pink
And gave me an even bigger hug and said Merry Christmas told me I looked really beautiful and that I was his “Christmas Angel” (I almost cried there) and left(he waved at me from the window the whole time too) so I left and I got to looking in the bag and it was coincidentally full of my favorite candy and at the very bottom was a Christmas card that said “if you received this, you deserve it
Merry Christmas from the ____ family” and it had $50 in it with a note that said “spend this on yourself, everyone deserves a special treat sometimes
Thank you for being a kind person
Jesus loves you and so do we”
That just blew me away
I was at the store putting my last $4 in gas so I could get to my aunts house for Christmas dinner later
I don’t need anything, but it was still just an amazing gesture that helped me more than they will ever know
Not necessarily the money but I just needed that act of kindness
It made me cry the whole way home
He was literally the sweetest person I ever met(and gave literally the best hugs ever) I really wish I could see him again, but I saw they had out of state tags on their vehicle so I probably won’t
But I’m just over filled with joy right now
I can’t get over how great that hug felt
It was like he knew me for years
And him calling me his “Christmas angel” tops the cake
That just put the most warmth in my heart
I wish I could tell him “no, you’re MY Christmas Angel”.
Quit drinking, and life has never been better
TL;DR - Quit drinking 3 weeks ago tomorrow, and literally every single aspect of my life has gotten 10 times better.
I'll try to keep this short, but wanted to share with someone
20 days ago I stopped drinking
My life had fallen into disarray, and it was entirely my own fault
I became an incredible toxic person, drinking nearly a 5th of whiskey every night
I was making terrible decisions, slacking off at work, when i would actually show up, treating my fiance like garbage, and treating my friends even worse
Had a very long conversation with my best friend and fiance', in what turned out to be the most sobering (no pun intended) moment of my life.
Tomorrow will be the 3 week mark of my sobriety
I completely stopped drinking, started searching for alcohol counselors, Boy oh boy am I glad I did.
I feel wonderful, health, motivated, and most importantly, happy
My relationship with my fiance' and daughter have never been this good
I've hated Christmas since I was a child for several different reasons, most circling around an abusive and manipulative mother
Yesterday was, hands down, the best Christmas I've ever had, and not because of the gifts I got, which were only a pair of gym shorts, and a baking dish from Pampered Chef (i like to cook).
It was the best one because I was sober, happy, and enjoyed my time with my fiances family
And even more, my fiance's uncle offered me some apple pie moonshine, and without hesitation, longing, or remorse, turned him down
It was the first time he had ever offered me a drink on a holiday, which is actually a bigger deal than it seems.
Need a pick-me-up
 Post below and I'll give you a heartfelt compliment
It's prime Seasonal Depression season, and I know a lot of us struggle with our image over the holidays
If you're feeling down, having a rough day, or if you feel fine but could use a little smile, comment below.
I'll take a quick look through your post history and find something about you that I like
Everyone deserves a little love for being who they are
 &lt;3
Probably my favorite thing about going on a trip is being able to come back and use my own bathroom.
Being away for a decent period of time always gives me a renewed appreciation for my bathroom and all it's done for me.
What's your favorite part of going on a trip

Does anyone else think folding laundry is one of the most tedious and torturous household tasks


Seriously, this is agonizing
 Plus it takes for-fucking-EVER because I keep finding ways to get distracted because folding the actual laundry is so boring.
Lyft and Uber drivers, be on the lookout.
One year in Los Angeles, I was driving til about 4am on New Years
I went to take my last fare, turned around in a parking lot, and saw two women there, clearly inebriated, one barely holding up the other
I stopped, opened my window, and asked if they were okay
The girl holding up her friend told me she thought her friend had been drugged, that her phone was dead and didn’t know how to get home
I cancelled my other ride, and proceeded to plot a course in Waze for their ride
Shortly after, a man came up to my window, extremely upset and drunk trying to get to the girls
I was pretty sure he was the one who drugged one of the girls, and was waiting for them
I called the police, he was arrested, and I drove them home
For Lyft and Uber drivers, please be on the lookout for this kind of thing
Be completely aware of your surroundings, and help those who might need it.
2019 has been the worst year of my life so far
So during these 44 hours of 2019 my lucky ass managed to:
fall of the stairs, crushing my ankle, breaking my foot
have a head injury and mild concussion
and (just fucking 30 minutes ago) pour soap into my eyes
I am literally dying, help also weather is just awful
This year is off the right foot (only one)
E: thank you so much for platinum, I hope you’ll have a great 2019

I have zero memory of anything I was never interested in.
Things I'm supposed to know, I never can because it was never intriguing to me in the first place
I just dont get how people who work in offices, or corporate settings are able to store tons of mind-numbing information in their heads and present or talk about them at a moments notice
For me, that information has to interest me first for me to ever remember it.
This thought came up because I just got a job working at a contract research organization
As I'm going through the training seminars, powerpoints, and reference documents, I realize I'll never be able to recall or remember any of this shit because of how dry and boring this shit is to me
I then had a harsh realization that I remember little to nothing of anything I learned from my courses at college, and start to wonder how I even graduated.
Anyone else ever feel this way
 I'm assuming no, with enough information repetition and training, anybody can recall any memory
But I just cant.
I saw the sweetest thing at the supermarket today and if made me cry
I'm still crying like a baby which is super unusual and I need to share this.
So I was just doing the usual grocery shopping at my supermarket
I was standing in the self check out line when I happened to see an old couple in the line next to me
They had to be in their late 80s at least
Little old man wearing a hat and a little old woman all wrapped up in a shawl
They only bought two things
A small box of strawberry ice cream and another small box of vanilla
I guess the cashier started talking to them but I overhead the old man saying that his wife always wanted the strawberry but she would always ask for something else
 But he knew her so well that he bought her the strawberry every time
And he made sure to leave some of the chocolate at the bottom for her because she always asked
And he said they did this every weekend
Buy ice cream , go to a specific bench in the park , and eat it together while looking out at the ocean
 And I saw them holding hands and leaving together
They were so sweet
I came home and cried my eyes out
I'm such a cynical person and am totally single and have stopped believing that love can happen for everyone
I'm not going to rant too much about this but I have terrible luck with love
I hate it
But this really touched my heart
A lot
Every time I think about it I cry
They are so sweet
If I can have that when I'm 80 I'll be really happy
That old couple gives me hope
Good luck to all the single ones out there, and to those who have found your forevers, cherish them for they are wonderful
Just had to share this with someone.
Finally got a job after 8 months of unemployment

I've been applying everywhere like crazy
Cant even remember how many interviews I've been to.
I used to work in home health care for special needs people, and it was the absolute worst
People say it's just so rewarding
Fuck no it's not
That shit is so mentally and physically draining
Compassion burnout is real
The pay sucks and the hours are worse
You're nothing but a warm body, and lucky to get a co-worker more competent than the client
I quit right after my 20th birthday
Even if I interviewed well, it's like a black mark on my resume
I refused to go back into anything like it.
Now I'm about to make double what I did there, and I can start tuition reimbursement in about a year
So glad the job search is over.
My new job will just be warehouse work driving a forklift, but it pays almost double what I used to make, and it's with a very good company.
I learned an amazing lesson from a substitute teacher years ago, and I just learned that he died.
When I was in middle school, I was bullied relentlessly, and had very low self-confidence
I walked around all day between classes with my head down, watching my shoes and the floor.
Mr T
saw me doing this in the hall one day, and stopped me
He asked me why I was looking downwards, and I had no real answer for him
He told me something to the effect of, “there’s nothing down there for you, and if you think that there is something there for you, there isn’t
You’re worth more than that.”
That stayed with me since I was 12 years old, and aside from watching for ice, I’ve never looked down since then
Instead, I’ve held my head high (or just eye level I guess) and every time I’ve felt anxious or self-conscious, and my eyes would dip low, his words, his sentiment, would echo in my ear
And I’d bring my head back up somewhat proudly.
I told a friend two weeks ago that this was the best advice that I’d ever received
I know it isn’t much, but for me it changed my life for the better
And yesterday, I found out through Facebook that he passed away after a battle with cancer.
Mr Turner, wherever you are now, you are not forgotten
I think about what you told me daily
You truly have made a massive difference in my life, and I thank you for it every day.
Keep your head held high, friends.
I just realized I could let the shower warm up before stepping in
I'm 28
The girl I was wkth wanted to take a shower together
"Why dont you wait for it to warm up
"  I stared back at her, a million thoughts running through my head
I feel so stupid, I couldn't enjoy the rest of the night
I has no answer for her, and I always hated showers
Today I stood and waited for the shower to heat up for the first time, and it was great

I dont know
Have you ever done something...this dumb
 I'm working on my masters and I feel like such a dumbass
I went to the store with $5,32 I had in leftover change.
I decided to buy apples and bananas, I don't remember the exact price per pound
But even though it was risky I decided not to weigh the fruit first
The total price ended at exactly $5,32
When I noticed I became very proud of myself, and pleased I didn't have to  remove a single banana from my items
This totally made my day

Overheard One of My Students Talk About How Much He Appreciates Me
Teaching is the only thing I’ve ever wanted to do, and while I love my students, this job is exhausting
I’m always planning lessons, making the materials for the lessons, grading homework and papers and other assignments
Almost all my waking moments are spent exerting energy towards my job and my students, and I walk into my classrooms every single day not knowing if any of it’s going to matter.
Today, I overheard one of my students express his appreciation for me
His tone was so sincere and enthusiastic, and it caught me off guard
My coworkers always mention how teaching is a thankless job, and it’s hard to not feel unappreciated when you spend so much time doing things for your kids when they don’t pay attention, blow off your assignments, sleep in class, talk over you, and such.
It’s just nice to know that, at least for one student, what I’m doing means something to him.
I want to especially thank all of you for sharing your experiences with your former teachers
It’s so heartwarming to read about the educators who inspired you, but it’s even more special to know that they’re still in your hearts after all this time
We remember how you guys made us feel, too.
I just got back my grades and I got an A for a subject I thought I was going to fail

:D
I really thought I was gonna get a C+ at best, and was bracing myself for a D-, but I got an A and right now I'm just so happy and amazed
I actually shouted in excitement when I saw the letter A, and my sister told me to shut up because she's a cranky old wet blanket so I'm going to tell this to everyone who can be happy with me.
Today my son went to the dentist and got a hair cut
Pretty mundane, right
 Well, my dear boy (9) is autistic and while he is high functioning in his day to day life, unfamiliar enviroments can send him into a tailspin
Today was not that day
 He got his teeth cleaned, got xrays, went into the 360° xray thing, and had the dentist poke around in his mouth with absolutely 0 problems, Also NO cavities

Then I asked if he was okay with getting a hair cut and he gave me an enthusiastic "Yep
" I was worried that we were over doing it a tad but he sat through like a champ
 The hair dresser even complemented him on his behavior.
After we were done with everything we went and got lunch and I told him how proud I was and he said "Sometimes you just have to power through the stuff you don't like." He looked empowered and confident.
Today was a good day
No tears
No fear
Just powering through the stuff
I'm so stinkin proud of my boy

My divorce was finalized yesterday and I'm officially a single dad of 4 boys
Took my boys to Chilis and the lady sitting next to us bought us all a Mini Molten after seeing how well behaved my boys are and hearing that they are bilingual.
It was a tough day
A good day though as my relationship was a broken one with my now exwife
But that simple act of kindness helped me smile and be grateful for even the small things.
I'm one year cancer free
 What are you grateful for

After 2 surgeries and chemo, the last surgery being a year ago, I've now been cancer free for a year
Everyone took very good care of me and I'm thankful that despite needing chemo and the second surgery things went very well.
What are you grateful for today
 :)
I complimented a lonely girl, and it had an effect
This was some time ago
In my school, there's this girl that usually sits by herself
She's either drawing on her tablet in a corner or reading a book
She doesn't put much mind into what she's wearing I assume, because she would always come in the same sweater and pants
I might be wrong
But one day, she came to school with this gorgeous black long sleeved blouse, that had holes revealing her shoulders
I've never seen her with this kind of clothing so it was definetly new.
I don't usually have any problem with telling people what I think, or to go up to strangers to say something, So I went up to her and told her that I liked her clothing today and that it fit her
She responded with a small smile , because she doesn't really talk much, but that was ok
I told her what I thought and I was satisfied.
But then, during the coming weeks, I noticed something different
She would start to come in different clothing, and she would also wear that long sleeved blouse more often as well
It made me really happy to see that a small compliment could really change someone so much
People don't get enough compliments
Especially not people that put down thought into how they look, or their crafting.
Have you ever complimented someone and noticed some kind of change

I’m about 1 year clean from self harm.
I never thought I’d get this far
The urges are still there, they probably always will be, but I put the knife away permanently
I don’t belong to those who’ve hurt me
Coincidentally, I haven’t spoken to my mother in a year.
I walked in on my roommate cross-dressing, and my reaction was not what I expected
My roommate thought I was out of town on a trip with the rock-climbing club for MLK weekend, but it got called off for bad weather
I turned back around and headed to the apartment
Walked in, heard him taking a shower
Now we give each other shit all the time, so I thought it’d be funny to scare him
I hid behind a couch, ready for him to come out
He came out, walked into the hallway to a full-length mirror we have, and....WTF
He had shaved his legs, was wearing thigh high black socks and a short gray skirt, a neck choker, had dark lipstick on, and had his typical neck-length curly hair teased up into a more typical feminine style
The whole sight was shocking to me for a lot of different reasons—partly because of how well-executed it was
He has a lot of naturally feminine features and a thin frame, but clearly he has done this many times before
Now since this guy really thinks he’s the shit (he’s a skinny dweeb, but a confident one), my first instinct was to jump up and embarrass him—this would be something my friends and I would never let him live down
But that didn’t really feel right
Instead, I snuck out to let him do his thing in privacy and texted him ”yo on my way back, trip cancelled” while I got coffee.
The real confession is....I think he pulled the look off well...really well...and I’ve been thinking about it for a few days now
Feels very weird
He has just been kind of a bro to me for four years and now all of a sudden when I’m talking to him, I notice his lips are kind of a nice shape
That’s the first first time I’ve ever written something like that about a guy
The fucking son of a bitch got me.
One year off drugs and one year into the best job ever



Today is 365 days clean from opiates
 I have the best friends in the world, I literally could not have done this without them
My best friend and I are going to a concert tonight to celebrate
She bought our tickets and everything; she’s absolutely amazing.
AND, in a stunning turn of events, my director at work has asked me to do a special project because I have been doing such a good job
 I am a private tutor, and my boss has asked me to start working on making a “Tutor’s Handbook”
Basically, it’s going to be a whole book on how to interact with clients, manage your schedule, communicate with parents and teachers, and long-term plan your sessions


There are almost 40 tutors here, and she asked ME to do it

 I am so excited


I literally cannot believe that just over a year ago, I had no job, I was pawning all my possessions for drug money, I was in a horrible relationship with an asshole who expected me to buy him drugs, and I couldn’t even afford medical care for the many MANY side effects of shooting up.
I love my friends
I love my job
Fuck heroin
The end.
I have no one to tell really, but I got my first publication in a healthcare journal

By no means am I bragging
I just have no one to share this with
Now you can google my name and not have my social media be the only thing that pops up
Thanks for reading :)
The amount of love going on here is too much

 Y’all the best

I just got my driver‘s license

And I’m so happy about it because it takes soo long to get them in Germany.
Anyways
 What is something you’re glad to have accomplished recently
 Let me know 😊
I am 55 years old and I just baked for the first time in my life.
Real baking, not from a box mix
I made bran muffins with raisins
They are cooling down so I haven't tried them yet.
Here is the recipe: https://www.allrecipes.com/recipe/25224/classic-bran-muffins/print/
recipeType=Recipe&amp;servings=12&amp;isMetric=false
Pic: https://imgur.com/a/b9WzSaA
My grandma recognized me today
Last year my only living grandma fell and broke her leg
After surgery she fell ill and was never able to make a full recovery and it took its toll on her mind, escalating the situation from a "simple broken leg" to a full set of senile dementia.
Since she climbed on that bed after surgery she never was able to sit anymore, which means that she's confined on her own bedroom
Since I'm her neighbor I'm always on her house talking to her, but she's delusional every day and do not recognize us anymore (she always refer to me or my mother as other people from the past that her mind makes her remember)
But today was different

I entered her bedroom to visit her as usual and, for the first time, she looked at me and smiled as if saying "I know who you are"
I decided to ask her if she knew who I was and the answer was "Yes, you're my grandson" and she said my name
 For the first time it felt as if I had my grandma brought back to me again and we chatted for a couple hours
We talked about life and about our past together, she talked how she was proud of me, that I became a fine young man and that she hoped to see me achieve success in life
She even complimented me for letting my hair grow

When I was leaving, as I waved her goodbye, she looked at me and said "please come visit me again so we can talk more" and it broke me inside knowing that she may not remember me at all tomorrow but it doesn't matter: I promised her that, as she took care of me when I was young, I'll take care of her and be with her until the end.
Above all I can say to you that, today, of all days, was a good day.
And for those who are going through similar situations I wish you all the best
Be strong and never lose hope

My Teens Said They Were Glad I Was Home Today

I am a divorced mom of 17 and 14 year old boys
So, of course, I work full time, but these boys are my life.
My boys love me, but they want me not around too much
You know how it is at those ages
They're always asking "When do you have to travel overnight for work again
 Or go see your sister
" Etc
And when I'm home, you know, they make themselves scarce
I get it
But it's sad for me, too, even though I was most certainly the exact same way as a teen.
Today I had an appointment in the morning and another in the afternoon so I just took the whole day off (a rare thing tbh)
I got lunch at a place I don't get to go very often and curled up with a good book I haven't had time to read.
When my 17 year old got home from school, he came up to my room sat on the edge of my bed, where I was reading, and actually told me about his day

 He kind of had a rough one
So we talked through some of the things that went on and he actually listened and heard me
Then he said,"Mom, you look like you're really enjoying your day off and I'm happy for you
I'm glad you were here to talk to when I got home."
When my 14 year old was about due to get off the bus, I leashed up the dog and walked to the bus stop
Honestly was worried that he'd rip me with "OMG I can't believe you met me at the bus like a kindergartner

 You totally embarrassed me
" But no
 He just strolled towards us, let the dog jump on him and lick his face, and I even caught him glancing back towards the bus to to see if any of his buds saw
But it wasn't in embarrassment
It was more like "Look
 My dog and mom are awesome
" Then...
he HUGGED ME
Right there on the sidewalk

 We walked home and he said "Mom, I am glad you were home today and it was really cool that you brought Pokey to meet me at the bus stop."
Ooooh....
all this just makes my heart BURST with unspeakable joy

 But honestly, makes me sad, too, because, while I love my career and I think I need to do it for my own mental health, I will never be, and never was, a stay at home mom
I'm single
If I don't work, we don't eat
Period.
So I had to share what my boys said and for teens or parents out there, see yourself in this post
 Even if you don't hear the words from your teen, or say the words to your parents, it's still there deep down
I had one day like this at least
Tomorrow they'll be asking again if I have any overnight trips coming up soon or turning their back and slamming the door on me
And it's OK.
I said no to opiates, twice.
Little history, am an addict, dilaudid is my jam
 Love that shit, but it controlled me
Got off with suboxone, currently have been off that for 2 weeks.
Yesterday I had some dental work done
Dentist couldn't save a tooth (I neglected myself for a LONG time)
The tooth broke, he had to dig, drill, and chip those fucking roots out

Novocain wears off quickly on me, so I got a crap-ton of shots
 Anyway, afterwards the dentist had me a prescription
I ask what it's for, he told me i would be in pain after the Novocain fully wears off and "this will help"
I told him to shred it
 I didn't take the Rx
He asked if I was sure a couple times.
Driving home, I'm swollen and in a lot of pain
 I passed right by my old dealers house, kept my eyes straight
 Didn't stop, but oh I wanted to.
Just kinda proud of myself
Thanks for listening internet strangers

How can I be less shy online

I use reddit a lot and have for a while (viewing and upvoting stuff, mostly memes), but I very, very rarely post or comment because I feel too shy all of the time whenever I think to
Even making this post was kind of hard
I'm usually not very shy in real life, so idk why I am here
I'm also generally like this anywhere online (on discord I've joined a couple public servers but then never said anything on it).
How can I become more confident online
 Also is anyone else like this

Recently lost 30 pounds and was told that I was hot
I was over at a guy's place last night, and he tells me that I was really hot and out of his league

I know I shouldn't place my value on what men think, but I've always been chunky and NEVER been called hot or even remotely referred to as such.
Just some clarification about the “value based on men’s opinions”
What I meant was that I was raised to believe that my self worth isn’t dependent on what men, or other people think
Especially something as vain as body types.
I’m just so shocked and flattered and I just wanted to tell people

I spent 3 years in prison
Dropped out of college when I was 20.
Now I'm back in school 10 years later, straight A's, studying my butt off, lift weights every day, eating a very clean healthy diet
I look better an feel better than I have in years
I'm 3.5 years sober and 5 years clean from Meth.
Just wanted to take a minute to say life is good
Thats all fam'

**edit 2: Got accepted to my 1st choice to study Nutrition and Addiction
 I really need help funding my living expenses and tuition
Please checkout my Etsy store if you need any handmade gift items, it really helps me out

My etsy store: https://www.etsy.com/shop/ArkansasHandmade
My Facebook keeps showing me wildly irrelevant stuff to the point where I have basically stopped using it since past 2 years.
I know the whole 'its a way to be connected to the people you know' thing but my Facebook feed is full of these weird ads and  'viral' videos that I just don't care about.
For example - I'd be scrolling through my friends' updates and suddenly there will be a video showing a 'lucky people' compilation or a food recipie or someone doing nail-art etc.
It ultimately started getting in the way of everything
I couldn't keep clicking 'don't show me posts from this page/person' for every such incident so ultimately I gave up
I barely use it now
Mainly I just use the messenger app.
I had my Facebook phase but it's long over
I just feel like closing the account but I can't because I have to use the messenger app
Facebook doesn't have a simple way of solving this issue either
I have to either individually unfollow every page/person or just bear with it.
Thank you for reading my post.
My new boss has a first grader that comes to my office after school
Apparently this little guy liked me, and he lets me know about all the gossip about me.
I have started working in an accounting office recently
It's rather a family place with flexible working hours and a relaxed atmosphere
We even have kids sometimes, my boss has a first grader, and after school he comes to the office for 2-3 hours until boss goes home
The first days I started working here, I noticed that the kid was being neglected
His aunt is my co-worker, but she wants to be left alone to do her job
Other coworkers have no family bond with him so they dont really give him much attention
My boss usually has too much shit going on, so he cant take care of him either, which is sad
Anyway, this kid sort of looks like me, but without the glasses
If any of my acquaintances saw me with this kid and I told them that he was my son, they would buy it (it's a joke I'm dying to try)
He is also into gaming, and even uses some slang words that I use myself (I didnt teach him, he knew them before I met him)
So I sort of bonded with this little guy and apparently he liked me too
Now when he comes to the office, he sits next to me
I urge him to do his homework and keep a little eye on him while I work
Nobody, not even his father, can make him sit down and do his homework, but there you go - he sits down and does his best to finish it
He also brings me sweets, candies, and even insists on sharing his chocolate with me.
With all my coworkers except my boss being females, I'm aware that at least some amount of gossip is going on about me
It's a fact that I accepted when I first started, and it's really no problem
But last week, this kid took it personally when his aunt said that I "only work for myself" when I was outside on business
When I came back to the office, he said it out loud in front of everyone, and even pointed his aunt with his fingers
He also told me each of my coworkers responses to his aunts' opinion, again in front of everyone
With all my coworkers' faces going full red, and me giggling on my desk, we moved on
None of us mentioned this ever since.
On a final note, I have a fear of children and I usually try to stay away from kids
After this incident I'm a bit nervous around him, since this can happen in other ways too
But then, I have bonded with him, which sort of helped me ease up
I dont know how to express it, but it feels weird when you're the only one that can speak some sense into a kid
I know that he's watching me and learning how I do things, so I be careful about how I do them
It's amazing how a kid can change you.
Today I overheard two women conversing on the subway
At one point, one of them legit turned to her friend (whose name was Becky) and exclaimed "Oh my God, Becky
" and it literally made my day.
They were two white ladies in their early twenties
I'm not even sure whether they know the song or not
As soon as I heard it, I let out a chuckle but I don't think they thought it was directed at them because I was staring at my phone
The song has been stuck in my head since then, and I can't help but smile when I think about it
Kudos to you, ladies

My grade went up and I almost have all “A”’s
A week ago I had a 58 in my Spanish class
I hated that class and then I had a come to god talk with my teacher and today I turned in almost all my missing assignments and it’s a 85 now :) She gave me a high five and said how proud she was.
But, Thank you guys for the kind words
I definitely will make sure this grade won’t slip

Sweet chinese lady who took my order corrected it to “no meat” because she saw my ashes
I got ashes today, and am supposed to not eat meat
I stopped in a chinese place to pick up some wontons (yum) and accidentally ordered beef wontons
She tapped her forehead in reference to my ashes and said “no meat today, just cheese
” What a saint because I forgot I even had them on my head all day.
Someone should start something like GrubHub but to bring medicine and chicken soup and shit to single people who live alone.
What the title says
I'm a single guy, live alone, currently have a moderate illness
Nothing requiring a doctor's attention, but definitely to the point that i dont wanna run over to CVS and grab the stuff i need.
Friendly reminder not to get a bunny/chick for your kids this Easter
They live 10+ years and are a huge commitment
They both are social animals and need more than one to thrive, need a ton of space to exercise, need fresh fruits and veggies daily, and can stink, especially chickens.
Don't get me wrong, they are wonderful animals to keep
But don't buy them because they are cute and fluffy and it's Easter and your kids will love them.
And for the love of all that is holy do NOT buy any animal that is dyed an unnatural color
I will personally hunt you down and make sure you never own anything living every again.
Thank you, have a good night.
For the first time since I can remember, this is the first time my family hasn’t been living paycheck to paycheck
Since as long as I can remember, we have been short on everything
We’ve been living in a trailer since I was in second grade and I’m currently in 10th grade
My dad got his taxes back and we’re all happy
He paid all the bills and some debt that he was in
He’s been stressing less
Our old phones were cheap androids from Walmart and both of our cars broke down
The place where he got his cars cut him a deal and bought both of them for 1000 each and used that money as a down payment for our current van.
He bought a small little car for work yesterday and we went clothes shopping
Normally we buy our clothes from Walmart but this time we set out for Burlington
We upgraded phones and we went shopping for food
Normally we buy what we can and make sure it’s on sale
When I came home today, I came home to my mom cooking on the grill outside and soda in the fridge ( our grill was broken).
I know this might be something others might not care but it made me feel good that we weren’t behind on things for once
Me and my dad have been saving up money behind my moms back for 2 months to surprise her for her birthday in July and we have 200 dollars already
I feel like I owe my parents so much because they’ve really tried their best
I only ask for what’s necessary and I’m going on my first field trip in high school this April

I just wanted to let someone know since I don’t have anybody else to tell this to
First cigarette in years went not as expected
So, I quit smoking about 4 years ago
I had a couple cigarettes in that first year, but haven't had one at all in like three years
After mulling it over a good bit recently, I picked up a pack of what I used to love smoking, Lucky Strikes, to allow myself the luxury of a smoke on a cool spring day
I figured it would be enjoyable, and this one pack would last me ages if ever finished
I have no interest in being a smoker again, and I have a lifestyle that would help keep me from it again.
Anyway, lit one up today at lunch and couldn't even smoke half of it
Got a wicked head rush, but damn, smoking is NOT enjoyable anymore
What the hell
 Luckies are 10 bucks a pack
I doubt I'll even smoke 2 of them
Haha.
Clearly my memories of enjoyable smokes in cool, sunny weather are from a time gone by for me
What a weird experience that was today.
My brother is officially cured of Cancer :)
I posted [this] (https://www.reddit.com/r/CasualConversation/comments/4p7gn1/my_little_brother_just_finished_his_last_round_of/) right around two years ago when my brother finished his last round of chemo
A few days ago he had his last "regular" meeting with his specialist, saying that he was cured and wouldn't have to see them for another 3 years instead of every other month
Just figured I would give all of you lovely people an update, if any of you still remember :) To any one who is fighting cancer, has a loved one fighting cancer,  keep up the good fight
If you need some encouragement, or have any questions about going through it all, I am happy to share
Have a great evening everyone :)
My boyfriend worked all night, all day, and is now spending his free time getting together food we don’t eat for the homeless ex vet in our neighborhood.
I wanted to take a minute to share something wholesome

My boyfriend worked a night shift last night and didn’t get home until midnight
After he ate, showered, and relaxed before bed, he didn’t get to sleep until 2 am.
We’ve been tight on money lately, so he took the liberty of picking up a morning shift the very next day
He had to wake up at 7 am to get ready for work at 8 am and didn’t get off work until 4.
4 rolls around, and I’m getting everything ready for him to come home and just relax since I appreciated him working on such little sleep
I wanted him to come home to dinner, pop open a brew and play video games until he fell asleep early
I even lit a candle and put on some mellow music so he had a nice atmosphere to mellow out.
To my surprise, as soon as he got home, without even taking his work clothes off, he started getting together some of the food from the pantry we don’t eat
He even got together a water bottle and a spare rain jacket
When I asked what was up, he said he was going to give them to the homeless vet in our neighborhood.
“His name is John.” He said
“He has a rain jacket, but it’s broken
He’s sick right now, so I wanted to give this stuff to him
You’re not going to eat any of this, right babe
”
My face flushed with love for this man
I was so happy
The nice gesture really caught me off guard.
I hope John stays out of the rain we’ve been having lately with that jacket and is warm and fed
He fought for our values and freedom and deserves to have faith in the kindness of strangers
The world really is a better place when we take care of each other.
Y'all remember when there was gum stuck on everything

I'm 37, and I remember growing up and constantly dealing with gum stuck all over the place
I just saw some and realized I haven't seen it in the longest time
I wonder what changed

I've been clean for 20 years as of this week.
It seems crazy, but sensical at the same time.
The weirdest thing is seeing all these new guys trying to get clean, trying to get off drugs I've never even heard of and can barely pronounce.
Thank you all again.
2nd edit: in a shitty twist, a guy who used to come around trying to get clean for a while disappeared a few weeks ago, they just found his body
Died alone in the woods
RIP buddy.
Today marks six years on Reddit...
And I've never posted on my Cake Day before
I almost held that streak, but now I've made this post
Give me a ridiculous reason why that's good or bad

Interviewed someone that claimed to have done my job, at my former employer, when I worked there nine years ago
A cautionary tale for people looking for a job:
I work for an IT consulting firm
A minor part of my job is to perform "phone screens" on perspective hires
I have a long background in IT, so I am used to "resume padding." I try to judge a persons actual technical ability, their ability to fit into our company, how they would do as a consultant, and try and get a gauge of their character
We have a wide spread of technical prowess on staff, so I focus on on the person
After years in IT, I think can do this pretty well.
Last week the owner sent a resume and called me to do a phone screen of a prospective employee
I happily agreed, not having read the resume
I finished my evening and went to bed.
The next day I read the resume.
This guy claimed to have worked at my former employer (a university)
Nine years ago when I worked there
Doing my job
As a student worker working to gain two masters degrees in two years.
Before you start laughing, keep in mind this will mess with you
You don't expect this level of dishonesty on a resume
I started asking myself when I actually worked at the former employer, what I may have missed, what could have happened
I actually reached out to former co-workers about this person
I managed a lot of the student workers, but not all of them, so I thought maybe I was forgetting someone.
Nobody knew him
It was suggested that perhaps the resume had formatting errors or he was talking about the wrong university.
I decided to give the candidate the benefit of the doubt, but I wanted to be sure about my former workplace
I called the registrar's office to verify the degrees
After much checking, we could find no record that he even attended the school.
I should have called off the interview, but at this point, I was still trying to give the benefit of the doubt.
I called him on time, and started the interview as normal
I explained the position, told him this would be a technical interview, and answered his first questions.
Ive gone from a 75% in math to an 88%
I've been giving myself a pretty hard time the past two years because it was really hard for me to get algebra
Freshman year I had a 75% as my final grade and I've gotten it up to 88% so far in algebra 2
I know it's not the best grade, but I'm still proud of myself and I'm hoping I can get it up to at least a 90%
Keep me in your prayers y'all 🙏
Joined Reddit Today.
So as the title says, I officially became a member today and am super nervous about it
haha  I'm not really good at interacting with people (I'm older than the average Redditor and I also have Asperger's, which is the pits
): ) so I hope to start with baby steps, taking everything in slowly posting on a few subreddits that interest me
 As I said, I'm nervous but kind of excited about it
 Anyway I just wanted to say hi and ask how everyone's day is going so far
:)
I discovered my supervisors fart room
You read correct
 A room a person goes to fart in
 Its a closet where we store our cleaners and mop in our stockroom.
Disclaimer: everyone poops
 Everyone farts
 And i would never tell anyone in person of what I witnessed, let alone coworkers
 So I just want to share anonymously
 if this thread blows up I will delete it..
I was taking my break in the stockroom
Typically you just go to the breakroom for breaks, but it was so hot in there
So i just found a chair and browsed my phone
Very much hidden from view.
My boss came in oblivious to me being in there
 She Walked into a small closet, closed the door, and alleviated the pain we all suffer
 Instinctively I sped walked away before she could discover me sitting.
I witnessed that not only is there a fart room
 I am witness that women do indeed pass gas
 With that being said, I'm more of a "crop duster" myself
Today I’ve decided to upvote more posts instead of just lurking and smiling to myself
All this time I’ve been just scrolling and sharing things with my friends and then I realised how much I love receiving internet points.
How is everyone, by the way

Do you ever randomly catch a whiff of a specific smell and immediately think "hey, that's the way it smelled in the spring of 2001 when I was playing Pokemon at my grandma's house"
Obviously this specific memory is just an example but I feel like smells are very particular and can trigger a memory more vividly than any other sense
Also, everytime a new season begins and the smell of the air changes I become very nostalgic and have a rush of memories from that season from various different years.
So I think reddit cured my depression...
I was depressed to the point which I didn't want to leave my room and I always had to throw a fake smile, till I found reddit as a great way to not only pass time but to have a true smile, I wondered around for a while checking all the sub-reddits for things I like and found new people to talk to
Probably the best choice I've made in my life
I've been talking to alot of people and even socialising with my friends again tellimg them about the things I find that made me happy
Thanks to all on this site for making me a better person and realizing there is happiness and life is what I make it.
I saw two of my friends in our social circle kiss each other in a club.
As a bro, I certainly am happy.
One of our friends is a girl and is the only one in our circle of friends.
We have been noticing how she's been acting around our tall and good-looking friend.
I decided to play my part: we were in her house drinking
She was offering the rest of us guys to stay over the night
But me and my friends decided to leave them behind to be alone, so they can "develop".
Fast forward a few weeks later, we were out in a club, having a grand old time.
The two separated from our group and what do I see from the corner of my eye

Them, finally making out.
I did a little "boo-yah
" in my brain.
The last thing I saw was her dragging him away from the club
I think we all know what happened next.
I have no idea what they are planning, but they are planning to see a concert in another city.
Free Subscriptions
Just a reminder for everyone to remember to cancel those free subscriptions before you get charged, I definitely could've used this yesterday.
My dad's funeral is today.
In a few hours, I'll have to speak in front of a group of people who have loved and will miss his presence in their lives
I'm pretty nervous and of course I miss him a lot
Could use some good vibes
💔
To the person I sat next to in Endgame (no spoilers)
I wish I could have asked for your name at least, but if you are reading this, thanks for engaging in my talks
Both of us came alone, and when that seating disaster where a whole family came to the pm show instead of am made you sit two seats away, I asked my neighbor if I could switch seats so that I could enjoy it with you
Thanks for making Endgame so much more better
I didn’t even know you, but we talked and sat there with so much excitement for the movie
Thanks for sharing your candy with me too, that was pretty nice of you :-)
And yeah I had a great night and thanks ::-)
The sequel to Now You See Me wasn't called Now You Don't.
I've been dissapointed about this every since it came out
Can't shake it
I guess they might have chosen to call it Now You See Me 2 so people would be sure it's a sequel to the first one, but it just seems like such a missed opportunity.
My friend showed exactly what kind of friend she is.
This girl and I have been friends for about 8 years now, it's been rocky at times, but today she really showed what kind of friend she truly is
Today, I was heading to work, I pulled into the parking lot, motor started knocking and immediately shut off, I couldn't check it though until lunch
Come lunch a buddy drives me to get some oil, we put in about 3 quarts (it was in the right range when I left but needed 3 quarts from 20 minutes of driving...), and I'm able to drive it now
I limp it home, hazards on the whole way, park it, and send a snapchat of the car saying "she's dead jim", to my close friends
She sees it, and immediately messages me asking if I'm in a safe area (I live in a shitty area), if I made it home, and then she asks me if my car needs jump started, that she'll drive over to do that
She lives almost 40 minutes away, and was willing to drop everything to come and help me
That's the kind of friend she is, and I couldn't be any luckier of a guy to have a friend like that.
https://gfycat.com/ThesePeskyDoctorfish Here's the car
My employer has offered to pay for 50% of my grad school tuition

I work at a nonprofit where I help create employment opportunities for people with disabilities, it’s a pretty sweet gig.
Last fall, I applied for grad school and was recently admitted
I got the sense that my employer wanted me to stick around, so I proposed an idea: If the company pays 50% of my tuition for online school, I’ll work at the company for two more years
Today, they accepted my proposal

I’ll soon start school to get a Master’s in Public Administration, which will help me become a director of a nonprofit (hopefully) in the near future.
I just shook a surgeon's hand and it was a surreal experience.
My girlfriend donated a kidney to her aunt today, and I'm in the hospital, visiting, being supportive
When the donor surgery was over, the surgeon visited us in the waiting lounge, told us that everything went well, and shook our hands
As he was walking away it blew my mind that (with the help of some tools) those hands just cut into my girlfriend and removed an organ
I've shaken pro athlete's hands, sat inside quarter-million dollar sports cars, gotten signatures from famous authors, stood on movie sets right where the actors had been, visited historical sites where world leaders lived and worked..
but nothing has ever been as surreal as shaking hands with a surgeon
I might just be susceptible because of the personal attachment
Just wondering if anyone else can speak on this.
Anyone else think they were raised by the internet

I mean like all the things I learned on the internet that you would never hear from your parents
Ask reddit stuff like: Social cues, things to know in your first relationship, things to avoid In general, common mistakes in your teens, 20s; things school doesn't teach you, history, proper habits, what losing your virginity is like, your biggest regret, proper college major, and the list goes on.
I find it interesting how on reddit, where everything is anonymous, people tend to be much more polite, well spoken, and decent than on social media such as facebook or instagram, where all of your personal information is shared with everyone.
Aside from some glaring exceptions, of course (looking at you, r/politics), people tend to be pretty decent here - especially in subs that are specific to a particular subject
When having a discussion on facebook in a similar group, at least in my experience, you find a lot more toxicity.
Maybe it's just the karma system that is keeping people decent, but it sure seems like people would be more careful on social media where your name is on the line.
I’m so happy

 I’m 96 pounds


I’ve been really underweight lately
My depression has stolen my appetite and almost my life
In January I weighed 89 pounds soaking wet, and I felt like I was literally dying, like my body was wasting away because I couldn’t will myself to eat.
It took 5 whole months to get to the point I’m at now, and I want to make it to triple digits one day
I’ve literally never weighed in the triple digits before and I’m 20 years old
I’m so close, I’m so happy that I’ve been able to get through this.
My chemistry professor almost made me cry this morning.
I lost my dad last fall semester over thanksgiving break completely unexpectedly
I dropped out of my classes and then failed a couple again this past spring semester
So, I am currently in summer classes to catch back up and I’m honestly excited
My professor came in at 8:30 this morning and gave us a little morale boost before the summer session starts
He said a little cheesy line; “my students will have to learn how to slay dragons.” Aka, we have to do well on his exams
However, at one point he looked me in my eyes and said “what dragons have you had to face in college
”
It was rhetorical, but it almost made me cry
It reminded me why im here and what i have to do, to make my dad proud and to keep going.
Slushies are the beverage of diminishing returns
The first few gulps of a slushie is like tasting the nectar of the Gods
 How it combats the hellish summer heat and stimulates your taste buds with a delicious fruity blasts but exactly two minutes in that all changes.
The perfect balance between shredded ice and syrup gives way to nothing but an immobile pile of flavoured frost that forces you to plunge your straw in and out constantly looking for that last spot of flavor- it's the oral rehydration equivalent of panning for gold.
In my impatience, I always tear off the lid and vigorously shake the cup back and forth by my mouth, sickening passing mothers and priests alike with my flagrant act of fellatio
Eventually that "2cool4skool" dog in the winter coat that plasters the side of the cup feels magnanimous enough to ejaculate the contents of the cup into my mouth, I now have to contend with the pain and shame of having this huge clumps of ice filling my cheeks and causing the sides of my head to writhe in aganoy

Tl;dr: slushies are really good and I'd benefit to let them thaw more
Eat it with a spoon/bigger straw
Give the bottom the ol' tappa tappa
Don't use a straw to begin with
I also saw some name drops for some very nice sounding outlets but I live in Africa so they're off the books :P
A redditor fed me.
I dont remember his username, but I commented recently a joke about how I'd only eaten a pack of ramen that day
This incredibly generous soul wired me 20 dollars
He said how it would only be one meal
But it won't be
I'm gonna buy groceries with it
It'll probably feed me for nearly a week
I'm so incredibly grateful.
What's the kindest thing a redditor has ever done for you

Give him the gold.
I am young and alive
First time in london, just got home from a pub hosting a 20's jazz night
I danced with an old man who said the words i might never forget:
'I was young like you once
Sixty years ago
I can almost remember it.'
I cried in the bathroom for around 10 minutes
I'm grateful I can experience this moment of youth.
I (18f) finally told my boyfriend (18m) I have aspergers

So having aspergers is something I dont think I have fully accepted
I have known since I was 14 and am very high functioning so it doesn't affect my life that much, but its just the fact that aspergers is never talked about in the media, especially about high functioning females, so I've never been able to even talk about it face to face with anyone outside my family.
We have been dating for about 4 months although talking for basically nearly a year
I was planning on waiting till after exams to tell him as I wanted to do it face to face but I just couldn't wait that long so I told him last night over text.
Apart from my closest friends I have told one guy who treated my awfully (only would show any interest when drunk) which I think was because of me having aspergers and him being embarrassed by liking me.
However, I literally couldn't have dreamed for a more perfect response from my boyfriend
He replied saying how he loved me for me and wouldn't change a thing about me and thanked me for telling him
He also said that if aspergers is part of my personality it helps make up a beautiful, funny idiot which you bet made me cry.
He also instantly realised that his indecisiveness may have been causing me stress and apologised which is so validating to hear as I often feel extremely guilty for "overreacting".
Anyway, as I really wanted to tell someone, but I'm not too comfortable talking about it to anyone I thought why not tell the whole of reddit
 I am incredibly lucky to have my boyfriend and I love him a whole fucking lot


I just finished watching all the Marvel Cinematic Universe films for the first time.
Did it over the course of a couple weeks in chronological order, from Captain America to Infinity War
I never really had any interest in watching them, as I don’t particularly like action movies, but I was bored and have some stressful shit goin that I needed a distraction from, so I said “fuck it, why not
”.
I was pleasantly surprised
 They’re so much more than action films
I didn’t realize how funny they were
Found myself actually cracking up on occasion
And crying lol
I’m legit sad I didn’t jump on this bandwagon earlier.
Now I just have to watch Endgame

UPDATE : Saw Endgame
And just...wow
Wow wow wow wow
There’s literally so many things I loved about it, I don’t think I’d have time to name them all.
Except Fat Thor
Fat Thor was truly a gift.
I got the weirdest internship
Long story short, I'm 24 turning 25, and I've been on sick leave for little over 4 years due to mental health issues
Late last year, I was admitted into a program to get me an internship to get used to work.
My background is in social science and music
I got a base education in psychology and sociopsychology, and I've held positions as therapeutic assistant on daycare centres for people with disabilities, I've been a store assistant, and most recently, a Librarian at a local newspaper.
I've been spending my overwhelming ammount of free time playing games
Board games and tabletop RPGs, primarily
I saw that a small LFGS (Local Friendly Game Shop) opened in time, so I sent them an email saying "hey, I work for free".
They took me up on the offer
We had a meeting discussing my experiences and qualifications, and what the store needed
They came and said what they really need is someone who can be social and play games with costumers and visitors
They've been missing having an in-house game master, so they asked me if I'd ve interested.
So, starting tomorrow, I'll basically be a professional board gamer
It's so weird, because this is what I used to do as a teenager instead of doing my homework or applying for summer jobs
So while they can't hire me full time, having this internship makes me eligible for wellfare checks, and earns me a little more from that check than I did when I was sick without an activity
It's surreal, but nice to see my experiences are paying off somehow.
My wallpaper got download over 5k times and it makes me kinda proud
Around a year ago I created a wallpaper out of pure boredom
I decided to upload it to a popular website for wallpapers and completly forgot about it
I've decided a few minutes ago to check for a new wallpaper on same website and see on the front-page of the categoy my work
2k views and 5.5k downloads
I know this is nothing special at all, and will probably not impress anyone, but it's kinda nice to think about that my work is seen everyday on hundres of screen around the world
Makes me kinda proud.
What makes you proud which wouldn't impress others

I have accidentally locked myself on my upstairs deck
My deck is full of WASPS
Chat with me in my final hours

My wife is hopefully on her way home to rescue me, but she works an hour away and there’s a non-zero chance that I will be attacked and killed by angry wasps by then
I’m wearing flannel PJs though so at least I’ll be comfy (though perhaps a bit overheated).
Anyway how’s your day going

My Hulu account was hacked a few months back, and I let it go because the people who were using it didn't change anything on it
They only watched stuff
And then this happened:
I knowingly had people on my Hulu account who I didn't recognize
I was too lazy to fix it only because all they did was watch stuff I'd never watch
There were 4 different unknown devices using my account
Then two days ago, a 5th one showed up and changed my email, password, and account settings to add on everything you can add on
My next charge was supposed to be $50+ a month
I had the $11.99 package.
I caught it and fixed everything
So good going, 5th guy
You ruined free Hulu with no ads for 4 other people because you got greedy
And shout out to the hackers of my account who didn't change anything of mine for a few months
Just because you're a "bad" guy doesn't mean you have to be a bad guy
To the guy who was watching Daria on it, sorry you couldn't finish
I saw how far you were getting the entire time
To the guy who had the device "andy's iphone," maybe change the name of your device because I think I know what your first name is
But anyway, you're a cool guy
To the 5th guy, you're a moron
You got too greedy too quick
Fuck you
You shoulda just used me to watch Hulu without the live tv thing
I woulda had no issues with it.
To Hulu, please add a two factor authentication option to accounts
Thanks.
Anyone else a loner and accept it

I had a stupid childhood in a sense that at school my mom was considered a weirdo with bad social skills, so my classmates' parents would tell their kids not to talk to me
I ended up being the ugly girl with the weird mom
So because of all that, I was ignored and learned over time to accept being a loner, even though it's always given a bad rep
Today I'm gonna go get lunch by myself at a nice restaurant because dammit I wanna go and I literally have no friends in my hometown so fuck it
If I wanna to go a nice restaurant I don't wanna wait around for others because there's no one else to go with me
So I'm gonna go enjoy my delicious dinner in about half an hour or so and enjoy my own company.
Are any of you loners
 Have you accepted it

My 8yo
daughter just asked me if I knew what a Human Centipede is.
I hesitantly said no and asked her
She said it's from a book she was reading where the kids tie each other's shoe laces together and try to walk
One kid falls and hurts their pinky finger so a slightly less graphic thriller of a story than the movie.
Craziest last 24 hours of my life
So within the last 24 hours:
Our neighbor in our apartment shot himself in the head
We all heard the gun shot and watched the cops and ambulance carrying him out, with his girlfriend crying on the pavement outside their door.
We got a call from our loan officer saying that we are clear to close on our first home
 Closing is on Friday.
My husbands company got called to do the crime scene clean up at our apartments
He normally does water damage/mold removal...first crime scene clean up and it was for the suicide that we heard happen
He cleaned up that horrific scene.
And I got call for an interview this Friday at a job that would pay me $1500 more a month, after taxes and the first job in my field of study after grad school.
I am still processing all the highs and lows of the last 24 hours
Just posting to let it all out.
Making someone laugh is the best feeling ever
I’m at work and have been having a really rough day with my shift and personal issues
I made a customer laugh and I had this massive rush of happy feelings that nearly made me cry honestly
Such a great feeling :)
What are some “Dad” things your dad does

It’s Father’s Day, and I’ll be celebrating soon
My dad is 91 and has been a father for 67 years.
Here are some dad things he does:
Brags about waking up early but instantly falls asleep when sitting anywhere for more than five minutes
will instantly wake up somehow if you attempt to change the channel and will say “hey I was watching that”
will bombard complete strangers with stories and pictures of his great-grand children
will ignore said grandchildren if the soccer game is on
will forever refer to his three daughters as “my lovely girls” or “my headaches”
will scold my sisters for bad language even though they’re both in their 60s
will go on for hours about “back in my day-“ until somebody stops him
will insist on playing nothing but mariachi music
Praising Keanu makes him visually uncomfortable
We as fans need to dial it back a bit.
Just read an article about people starting a petition to make him Time Magazine’s Person of the Year
Look, you love Keanu
I love Keanu
We need more people like him
But when you see people ask him “people call you the nicest person ever, what do you think about that
” You can see he gets uncomfortable and shifts the conversation or puts the praise on the people he works with
 I think we need to dial it back for his benefit.
I'm changing my life
I used to go to bed with anxiety and dreading tomorrow
I'm in my late twenties, was working as a teacher and had been in the same relationship for eight years
I felt like "this is it
 Really
"
So I decided it was time for a change
 In two weeks I will be moving to Switzerland to start a pastry program
Lost the boyfriend and selling the condo
I took a leave of absence from work and started to go running every morning
I have never, ever felt so sane in my life, despite all these dramatic changes
I know my program will work out, and of it doesn't
 Well, I know I can deal with it, because I have already taken the scary step
The world ain't got nothing on me anymore
 I'm feeling so good, so I thought I'd share :).
(One regret tho..
Didn't ask out my crush...)
I'm now cancer free

I had a very worrying and (quickly) growing lump in my arm, and I got it removed yesterday
 It wasn't glamorous, but it feels good to not have to worry about whether I'll make it to see my insurance rates drop at 25
Also, pain killers do a number on your mind
WEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE

The best joke I’ve ever made
Ok so one day me and my boyfriend were watching a movie and Steve Gutenberg came up
My boyfriend mentioned Police Academy and Cocoon and I reiterated I’d never seen them
He laughed at me and said something along the lines of “what kind of childhood did you have

” And then I came up with the best line of my fucking life:
“I guess my parents raised me on a....Gutten - free diet.”
I then proceeded to laugh snort at that for an inappropriate amount of time, and fart so loud I traumatised his dog.
We are no longer dating.
It was worth it.
Thank you for reading.
Someone once told me a deja vu is life telling you that you are on the right path, that you are where you're supposed to be and your future self has been there before
I think that's a very romantic way of looking at it, but it's something that's stuck with me for years now
Whenever I experience a deja vu, and I experience very few, I go back to this
"Oh, so this means I'm on the right track"
Sort of like your life giving you a nod that, you are supposed to be here - let me show you, your future self has been here
So you feel like this whole thing is familiar, because you are supposed to be there; you've been there
It's kind of nice when it happens
You forget about it, so all the times you are NOT having a deja vu, it's not about "oh, I'm not on the right path" but when you do suddenly have one - this comes to mind and it gives me such a positive energy
I don't normally believe in any of this stuff, but it's a nice way to look at it don't you think

God bless those random small folks who make tutorials on YouTube



You know the ones I am talking about
 They barely have any subscribers and it's usually a video from like 2009
And, sometimes its the only video on their channel but it fits your exact problem to the t
Well, God fuking bless them



 🙏🏼🙏🏼🙏🏼
My boss sent everyone this "parable" today
She sent it meaning it to be inspirational I guess, but to me it is everything that's wrong with the current work culture in America
Today this showed up in my work in-box as an attachment
Everyone in the company was told to read it and "come prepared to the meeting to share your thoughts."
Here it is:
&gt; There was a young man who had ambitions to work for a company because it paid very well and
was very prestigious
He prepared his résumé and had several interviews
Eventually, he was
given an entry-level position
Then he turned his ambition to his next goal—a supervisor position
that would afford him even greater prestige and more pay
So he completed the tasks he was
given
He came in early some mornings and stayed late so the boss would see him putting in
long hours.
After five years a supervisor position became available
But, to the young man’s great dismay,
another employee, who had only worked for the company for six months, was given the
I'm going to propose to my girlfriend later today

My girlfriend and I have been together for a while and have talked about marriage for at least half the time
She's my bestfriend and I'm so excited to start planning the rest of our lives together.
After surviving one of the most stressful weeks of my life (family, work, etc.), I'm going to be proposing
I've planned the day with some out of town friends to surprise her and she has no idea
I know she'll love it but theres always that sinking feeling of whether she will enjoy the day
Crossing my fingers that everything goes down without a hitch

I'm pretty nervous, but ecstatic to finally give her the ring.
Interested in hearing other stories
 Apologies in adavance because I'll not be able to respond for most of the day.
1st Update:
She never said "yes" but...she said yes
I was able to surprise her by tricking her into turning around as I pulled the ring out from my sock.
When she turned around, she had tears streaming
Immediately after, a couple of her friends who were hiding in the bushes popped out and surprised her.
More tears.
We preceded to take more pictures for about 30 minutes
It was a lot of fun
Then, we took an uber to a part of town where I told her we had a reservation for brunch
Little did she know, there were about 20 other friends waiting for us at a bar.
When we got there, they all yelled surprise and the whole bar erupted
Yet more tears.
I just heard music for the first time in my life
Which songs should I listen to

Unfortunately, my parents took me on a ride on a jet plane when I was a few months old and I had been deaf since then.
We live in a third world country and since my dad worked in the army, we couldn't afford a hearing aid
I didn't have any idea what "sound" was
Today, I got a hearing aid as a present from an expat visitor and I could hear for the first time in my life.
He played the song "We are the world" by Michael Jackson
It was overwhelming at first but I couldn't help but fall in love with the singer's voice
His voice somehow comforted me
I experienced the peace I never knew existed.
What other songs should I listen to

Sorry, I'm all teary after hearing for the first time
I wish I could talk to you guys via voice chat to hear everyone although I'm sure I wouldn't be able to make out what you're saying
I think if people are talking about good things, they would give me that 'good feeling' like the song
I'm not really sure of course
Thanks again

I just found out that the Afghan boy I taught his first German words is fluent now, has a job and will be able to stay here indefinitely
I am so happy
I am a teacher and taught a couple of Afghan women (ten or twelve) a few years ago at the height of the refugee crisis here in Germany (as in, I taught people who lived in a gymnasium and slept on cots)
Even though I am a woman, it was difficult to connect with the women
They didn’t know the alphabet and only spoke Farsi, but there was a then 17 year old boy who came to every single class and basically helped out as a tutor
He came alone all the way from Iran where he was born (but had an Afghani passport) because his family sent him here
He had no future in Iran
After two months, he was almost fluent in German
He did basically nothing else but study all day
His dream was to become an engineer and stay in Germany
After he was suddenly brought somewhere else (this, infuriatingly, happened often - women I taught and had grown close to, whose babies I held while they wrote down letters and told me about their life (the boy translated) - would suddenly not show up anymore and the others told me they were relocated, often without any warning), we wrote on whatsapp a couple of times but then life took over, I had a third baby etc
Yesterday we met for the first time in three years and I‘m so proud of him
His German is fantastic
He finished school and is in a vocational training program
He joined it because he feared to be deported if he was just a student
In the meantime he got his approval to stay indefinitely and after his vocational training, he can go to university
He is so bright and such a joy to be around
I am so happy right now and apart from my husband had no one to tell, so I‘m telling you, reddit
:)
I’m taking my ex-wife and her husband on vacation.
I’m going to try to make this short:
My ex-wife and I were married for seven years
We had three children
We got divorced over nine years ago
The first year was rough—like any divorce
Both of us had to find our place in the world
We never used the kids as a weapon, and both of us made sure equal custody was never in danger
So, things were amicable.
We have an autistic son
His behavior in school and at home became so awful that we blamed ourselves
Our relationship got better because we were trying to figure out where we were going wrong
Her husband and I had multiple theories, but she knew the source was school
She hid an old iPhone in his backpack and recorded audio from the day
Short version: he was hit multiple times and tormented by a teacher’s aide all day.
We went to war with the school
There were a lot of late nights trying to determine what to do
This was five years ago.
Five years ago, she also had a baby with her husband
Her husband came to my house soon after and said, “It must have been tough seeing a guy move in with your kids
I don’t think I understood that until I had my own kid.
Last year, they asked me to be their child’s godfather.
The most common reaction to this—“That’s weird.”
He’s a mechanic and takes care of my car
We’re both musicians, so we play together often
I keep their kiddo for them whenever he doesn’t want to be separated from his siblings
Etc., etc., etc.
That’s the basic rundown of our relationship over the last nine years.
I was very fortunate to get a side gig this summer that pays very well
My kids have never been on vacation
My ex-wife’s husband have never been on a plane
None of them have ever left the country
So I bought tickets for everyone to Rome the week of Christmas.
Starting over at 50
Start my new job tomorrow.
I am getting divorced and have been a housewife for 5.5 years
 I start my new job tomorrow
 I will be managing an apartment building in Chicago and living on site
 Moving from a 3000sq ft home to a large studio but it will be mine
 I am excited about this new chapter in my life.
The perk of being an adult is doing your own grocery shopping
Today I bought a green tea-scented dishwashing liquid and I am very happy.
Sure, you have to pay your own bills but think of all the stuff you always wanted as a kid but your parents weren’t interested
Now you can buy them all
 (well, almost)
As a kid, I always followed my parents to the supermarket
I was fascinated by those fancy-scented cleaning products
Cherry blossom detergent
 Heck yes
 Unfortunately my parents always stick to what they use and like
My mom has always been in charge of groceries so for 26 years of my life, our house used the same lemon-scented dishwashing liquid
It’s good
But I got tired of it.
I moved out when I was 26 (adult kids living with parents is perfectly normal in my culture—just to clarify)
For 2 years that I’ve done my own grocery shopping, I never buy lemon dishwashing liquid
My staples are orange and strawberry.
So today I went to the store and spotted a new product sitting next to my mom’s favorite Lemon
It’s the same brand but with green tea scent
 I love green tea
 I put it in my basket, paid  and head home
There is a coffee mug waiting to be cleaned
Oh
My
God
It smells sooooo nice
12-year-old me would be happy to learn that now I can buy my own dishwashing liquid in ANY scents I want.
Thank you for coming to my TED Talk.
I just got adopted
As a 24 year old adult
Life is good.
19 years ago my father met and married my stepmother
They only dated for like 3 months beforehand
My dad used to wear a lot of Hurley tank tops and my stepmom broke the ice by saying “what are you
 Some kind of surfer dude
” Outside an AA meeting.
5 year old me thought she was so cool
She played with me, and she had a dog
She took me to playgrounds and all kinds of fun places
It was amazing.
It was more than I could ever say about my birth mother
My childhood with her consisted of extreme abuse, neglect, and an unsafe life brought on by her drug use
Spending more than 24 hours locked in a room with my infant siblings was a regular occurrence
My dad fought for custody for years but didn’t get full until I was 5.
I remember the day I moved in with my stepmom
She showed me what would be my very own bedroom and took me to home depot to pick out what color I wanted to paint it
You would have thought I won the lottery
I jumped in her arms and told her I was never going to leave
I said I would bring my husband too and we would live in my very own blue room lol.
The following two decades she did everything a mom should do
She came to my plays, stayed up when I was sick, brought me to skating lessons, picked me up from school when I couldn’t get my snow pants off in time and I peed my pants
She came and cheered proudly at my graduations
She’s answered 1,000 of my calls to help me work through problems, be a shoulder to cry on, the first to hear good news, and just to chat
She was even the first to listen to me scream and sob when I found out I became pregnant whilst going through a medical treatment that wouldn’t allow me to carry to term
She’s always been there as an unwavering support for me even on the worst days of my life.
For her birthday I decided to get her the papers to adopt me and my brother.
Today we went to the courthouse
Surrounded by friends and family who have gone on this journey with us over the last 20 years
We had a private ceremony with a full room and full of happy tears.
I’m just so grateful to have her as my mom
She even got me a bracelet with today’s date and “Olet Rakas” (You are loved) inscribed
She thinks of everything.
Thanks Katri for always being my mom
It feels good to have the paperwork in order.
tldr: bio mom was a piece of garbage and I was raised since 5 by my wonderful stepmother
Today at 24 she adopted me.
I hugged the pizza delivery guy
Because he needed it.
So, I ordered a pizza for my wife and myself
 Pretty standard fare
 Delivery guy shows up, it's the wrong order.
Pizza guy was a kid, maybe 20 years old, more likely 18 or 19
  He apologized and left with a glum look on his face
 About twenty minutes later he showed back up with my order and he just looked defeated
 Initially I had planned to give him a 20 and let him keep the change for the tip, but they discounted the order and it was just shy of 10 bucks
 There was a ten spot sitting on the hutch by the front door so I just handed him that and asked him to hang on a second because I knew I have fives in my wallet in the other room
 But I guess he just assumed he wasn't getting a tip when I walked away from the door with the pizza.
The kid walked back to his car while I wasn't looking, I guess he figured he was out of a tip
 I go back to the door and see the kid getting into his car on the street
 So I walk up the drive to the street and wave him back.
"Hey
 You're tryin' to leave without your tip
" I yelled to him, but he couldn't really hear me from inside the car so he got out and met me at the top of the drive
 He asks, "Oh, was something else the matter
"
Instead of answering his question I asked him, "What's got you so glum, son
"  Keep in mind, I'm a big guy, with a beard, and a belly and I wear Bermuda shorts in the middle of Texas
 Think Urban Grizzly Adams but a little angrier looking.
The kid was obviously surprised by my question
 But he answered honestly and told me, "I'm from a small town East of this major city and it's my first month here and it's been a rough couple of weeks."  So, I asked him to go on.
He went on to tell me he missed his parents and his friends, but he was dedicated to his schooling and that it was necessary for him at the time being
 And I said to him, "That's it
" and just kinda left the question floating between us and that's when he says to me, "Well, my boyfriend also broke with me and it's been really tough."  Then he had this look of mortification on his face when he, I guess, realized he just outed himself to a stranger that he didn't know from Adam.
I looked at him and said, "Oh, man, that's rough
 Well, here, you were trying to leave without your tip."
As I was handing him the cash, I said, "C'mere man.", and opened my arms up for a hug
 This kid just threw his face into my chest and hugged me back so hard that I knew in that moment it was the right thing to do.
When the hug ended, not too long, not too short, I held onto his shoulders, looked him in the eyes and told him, "It's going to be okay
 You're young, and feelings can be overwhelming, but keep your chin up and your nose in the books
 Ten years from now you'll have forgotten about what-his-face and you'll be happier and more successful than you can imagine now, especially if you continue to be the honest person I think you are."  Or something like that.
I’m no longer a homeless Veteran

I was in the Army for 9 years
 I went straight to Afghanistan after training for a year, then on to Egypt where I was in Cairo for the second Revolution.
I did Military Funeral Honors for a year, then taught as an instructor to teach the new Soldiers how to do their job for 3 years.
Fill in the space not listed as time spent behind a desk loving life enjoying the Army.
In 2017 after 9 years in I got a bit jaded
 The Army changed from a force of action to a force of (who can Impress the General by mowing grass the best).
I decided I had done my term and I’d take a shot on the outside.
Boy was that a mistake...I bounced from Atlanta to Boston to Charlotte
 Back to Atlanta and now I’m in Wichita KS.
Having the specialty in the Army that I had is not very relatable in the civilian world.
The point of this post isn’t asking for sympathy
 It’s encouragement

I had undiagnosed issues both physically and mentally from my time in Afghanistan and Egypt.
Having people try to kill you on a daily basis for over 2 years apparently isn’t good for you lol.
I finally told someone IRL how I truly felt and now am getting a therapist
For 17 years (am 17 years old, birthday coming in a few months) I have hid my dark thoughts, been dismissed for my condition's chronic pain, my loneliness, wanting to escape reality, etc, and now, I feel so relieved
I sobbed so hard in front of my psychiatrist and he said I was brave and to contact him or 911 if I ever reach that point
He recommended a therapist he thinks will match my personality
I just feel liberated even though it’s just the start of my journey to mental health recovery (my post history describes my two rare conditions and other minor physical problems that all created bottled up emotions and unwanted thoughts)
I am ready to get better.
Saw a back to school ad on tv and immediately felt anxiety, until realizing I graduated years ago.
I was just  working on some stuff when a commercial came on for back to school
For some reason I got anxiety and started thinking "oh damn wtf it's only July."  But then I suddenly realized I was no longer in school and felt a wave of relief
Those days were usually a very stressful time for me, and I suppose I even associate commercial ads with it
Overall, It's amazing how fast time flies lol
Anyone else have funny or interesting stories of relief

I(18f) started crying when my dad called me pretty today
Conversation went:
Me: “I’m getting off work at 11pm-12am tomorrow”
Dad: “Don’t walk, I’ll come by to drive you home”
Me while laughing: “Why
”
Dad: “You’re pretty so it’s dangerous”
I’m honestly shocked about how fast it was for tears to start falling
He, also surprised, asked why I’m being ridiculous lol.
This is honestly the first time he’s called me pretty without someone else prompting him to that I can remember
I’ve been struggling with my body image for a long time and lost a drastic amount of weight in a couple of years
The only time my dad has complimented me during that time was about how much better I look without the weight
I know the validation isn’t necessary but I guess it’s what I wanted to hear at the moment
final edit: just got off work and took a pic of my dad and I : https://imgur.com/a/XSxVJBW I may have took a bathroom break just to read everyone’s comments :) I love how kind and understanding this sub is
I'm 31 years old and I finally got my drivers license

Embarrassing I know...
but I am a single mother and after I took my son on the bus where the bus driver refused to stop when I couldn't close my stoller while I held my baby...
I promised my son I would get my license so he won't have to go through that again and here I am


 Soooo happy


So many things have changed now ❤
I live in Los Angeles where there is a lot of public transportation so I never felt the need to drive
But that all changed when I had my son
Last time I took my son to a museum on Uber and I had to take the car seat with me
It was so hard and a group did laugh (they were young so it's ok)
But now I don't have to do that anymore
Tears I tell you
 Lol
I’m falling in love in a healthy way for the first time in my life and it’s really beautiful.
After spending some much needed time single, I recently met an amazing guy
He is honestly one of the smartest, most kindhearted, and amazing people I’ve ever met
We’re both in a place in our lives where we’ve had a few relationships that didn’t work out, know what our roles were in the downfall of those relationships, and are ready to do this one right with everything we’ve learned about relationships from our mistakes in the past.
We’re both in our mid-20s and share a feeling that we’ve both become an “adult” in the last couple of years
We’ve been 100% open and honest with each other so far, even when it’s tough, and it makes things so much better than trying to hide or omit stuff like we’ve both done/experienced in the past
I can’t wait to see how this one plays out.
I think hugs are necessary....they are magic.
It's nice to just hold the people you love and squeeze them
I get to feel like, "I'm holding my person".
It's also nice to get hugs, it feels good to be held.
My father is a millionaire
Earlier this year, I found out that he's only leaving my siblings and I $10,000 each
I'm not even mad.
Who my dad was as a father was infinitely more valuable to me than any amount of money he could leave to me
He raised us to be disciplined and compassionate at all times
He was loving, wise, and always put other people's needs ahead of his own
And I want nothing more than to be like him.
The rest of his money is going to a few different charities
I will gleefully see that these endowments follow through as he wished, and will continue to give my own money to them in his memory.
I hope that each of you has someone in your life like this
If not, you can start by being that person to someone else.
Went to a nightclub again by myself
UPDATE
So the other day I wrote on here about some guys picking on me in a night club and it made me feel like a loser.
I have the week off work so I decided to go out again as its cheaper on a weekday.
I went into the club again and bought a drink.
I went outside in the smoking area and got chatting to a woman
We danced all night and exchanged numbers and I am meeting up with her this week.
I also bumped into my other friends which I haven't seen in months later on in the night and had an amazing time.
I wasn't going to let them guys stop me from going out and I'm glad I didn't as I met a really great girl and had an amazing time.
Thanks for everyone's support in my first post and giving me confidence to go out again.
It's 5 AM on my 24th birthday
I'm in my last year of law school, in love with an amazing man, and about to submit my first brief to the United States Supreme Court
I couldn't be happier
In the last year I've wrangled my mental health and I'm in a better place than I've been in years.
In the moment these accomplishments seem insignificant to work and time put in, but they're huge.
What is something going well in your life now

UPDATE:
Many people asked about the brief I was working on
I will not identify the exact brief for privacy purposes but here is the Supreme Court link to the case, Allen v
Cooper
All of the Amicus briefs filed are at the bottom
I wrote one of them ;)
https://www.supremecourt.gov/search.aspx
filename=/docket/docketfiles/html/public/18-877.html
I am happy to answer all questions you have about it, except those that would identify the one I wrote.
My dad caught me crying
My (20f) dads not the emotional type , he doesn’t say I love you or anything like that but I just moved back in with him after ending things with my abusive ex boyfriend , it’s been about two weeks now and tonight was the first time I’ve actually felt sad and alone so I started crying , he told me “ it’s okay to cry , just remember what it is that’s making you cry , I hope your smart enough to never go back to the things that make you feel like this , after your done crying look at yourself in the mirror and tell yourself that your worth so much more then how he treated you“ and it was just the most inspirational thing he’s ever said and made me feel so much better ..
My boyfriend remembered something small I liked & it really warmed my heart.
I’ve been with my boyfriend since we were in high school - 11th grade
We’re 24/25 now
He’s the love of my life and I truly don’t know what I’d do without him ; I’ve got long nails &amp; can’t crack open my can of Diet Coke w/o him :P
We got drunk &amp; played pool the other night after a very long week of work then went to get food
Where we live there’s usually only 4 choices for late night meals (McDonald’s , Taco Bell, Sonic , or Halal) and we picked Taco Bell
I was excited to hear they still had pizza available (it’s one of those Taco Bell/Pizza Hut hybrids) and got that
I always ask for extra marinara bc I like to dip my pizza in it too
He ordered my pizza and asked for extra sauce right away without me asking or reminding him
It’s something so small but it really made me smile and made me feel all fuzzy for him as I always do.I’m not setting the bar low like omg he remembers I like extra sauce lmao
He always goes above &amp; beyond for me, but I just think it’s nice when they remember the minuscule things.
Update as of 6:17PM: Please stop commenting saying that this is sad because I’m praising him for doing something he should already be doing , this was suppose to be a feel good post to share with others and to have a discussion about the cute things our SO’s do for us
Get your heads outta your asses and just spread some love omg.
I just deleted all of my social media(besides the best one;) and got rid of all of the toxic people in my life.
I finally feel like I am in a sense of control sort of
I feel lighter and extremely energetic
 After several years of only having people talking to me because i can get them weed is over
Maybe i can now actually start to make some real friends for once
 I still dont really know whether to be excited or nervous becuase now I feel like Im gonna start a lot of drama but Im trying to think happy and keep on the lighter side but idk
I really just hope that this is a step in a better direction.
Hi today I turn 18 and everybody forgot
Pretty much the title, everybody forgot my 18th birthday, my family/friends everyone
It would really help if you all shared your worst birthday stories to top mine.Edit : I am reading each and every story but its taking me some time, so pls dont mind if I dont reply to you but remember I have read your comment.
Yesterday I went to a kids birthday party.
And was shocked that I was the only one who came.
For context, I'm 20 and he just turned 13
We know eachother through our parents
We usually play minecraft or other games when he's over
He's hyperactive and goes to a special school
At first, I didn't want to stay long, mostly because I thought there would be friends his age
I was shocked when he told me that all his friends cancelled at the last moment, so I decided to stay and play games with him till late night
I could tell that he was quite happy that I came.
I don't regret going now
I can't imagine him having to blow the birthday candles alone.
I ran my first 5k but my family wasn't happy for me
So I went to the gym today, I've been a weight lifter for years now and recently just got into cardio.  I got hooked on running and bought some cheap running shoes to try it out before I wanted to commit 100%.  Turns out I like it a whole lot

I've never done cardio in my life beforehand, just some light boxing and jumping rope but never anything to push myself further.  I've been concerned that my body fat is getting high, I have a bulky build and I'm over the physique.  I wanted to make a change and slim down. 
I walk in the door and I say "I ran my first 5k today
"  My mom looked at me then turned her head away, and my brother and dad didn't even say hi or look in my direction, they blew me off.  My mom brushed me off and said "I do 5 miles on the elyptical".  She doesn't understand that a 5k isnt even 5 miles, it's 3.1 miles.  Also, she doesn't put any resistance when she does it either
 I felt like I set a goal and challenged myself and completed it.
Well here I am, alone in my room after sweating my ass off, so I just wanted to tell reddit I ran my first 5K today and I've never been more proud of myself in years

Today is my 10th anniversary of quitting smoking
Ten years ago today I smoked my last cigarette
 I was at work and I asked my coworker for a cigarette
 He gave me one and I pointed at the clock and said “It’s 4pm now this is my last one
”  I never looked back
 I even inspired my coworker into quitting.
Thank you all for your kind words and support.
I just got a scholarship for the best university in my country and I'm on the freaking moon right now.
My parents were "secretly" stressing about my university tuition and today I got the chance to tell them that I'm one of the 9 chosen out of hundreds who applied for this scholarship
They were ecstatic and extremely proud
I've been keeping it a secret during the entire application process so that I'd surprise them if I got it and not disappoint them if I don't
Thankfully, things worked out perfectly and I gave them one less thing to worry about.
My best friend called me after 3 months and it felt really good
So like a few months ago I shifted from India to the USA
I am a teenager and don't relate to basically anything that they say
My English is very good so that wasn't a problem, but I just find it hard to make friends here
Then one day I got a call from an unknown Indian number.
"Kaun hai
" (Who is this
)
"Tera baap huun madarchod
" (It's your daddy speaking motherfucker
)
Only one person talks to me like that: my best friend
That made me really happy to hear and the time difference only allowed us to talk for like 15 minutes, but it was heartwarming to hear someone and catch up on stuff
I am quite lonely here and just thought I would like to share this here.
Celebrating a $40k raise by myself
Recently graduated school and went from making $18k/yr to a little under $60k.
All it took was completely relocating to a place where I don’t have any friends.
I’m celebrating tonight with a cheap hotel (with a hot tub nonetheless), some booze, and some Doritos
Why
 Because I’ve earned this shit.
Haven’t drank coke for almost 3 months now
Ever since I was 11 or 12 I started drinking coke
Since my family used to be poor and couldn’t afford any sweets I’d just buy a 1,5l coke as a substitute
I’ve been drinking a whole 1,5l can of coke by myself for 8-9 years almost every day and even though I‘m not that obese I’m still overweight mainly because of that
That was until 3 months ago when I started water fasting, my water fast didn’t last long but the 3 days it lasted was the longest period of time without coke for me
My family was really praising me a lot and telling me how proud they were of me so I just couldn’t bring myself to drink coke again
During the first few weeks I thought about it a lot and even drank a small coke zero but I’ve stopped drinking soft drinks completely and I won‘t ever think about replacing water with a soft drink anymore.
I know this sounds ridiculous but I’m just so proud of myself since this is a big achievement for me and I just wanted to share it with as many people as possible.
I’m fighting my stutter

I’m a 17 year old stutterer
Ever since I was little, I’ve had a stutter
About 2 years ago, it was really bad, but it’s gotten better to the point where I can call people on the phone and raise my hand in class
Sure, I stutter a lot, but I’ve been able to sort of hide it from the world
But recently, my school had an activities fair where you get to choose clubs to do
I said “fuck it”, and joined Mock Trial and Speech Club, both a stutterers worst nightmare
I feel like this is the year that will be different for me, and I’m trying to make it that way

I accidentally flashed a group of people at a coffee shop today
I was planning on going to a drive through, so I did not get fully dressed
I just slipped on a dress without undergarments as I wouldn't be getting out of the car
Well, the drive through was closed so I went to another coffee shop by my house, no drive through
Whatever, It's a hipster spot so I reckoned I would fit right in without a bra
I brave up and get out of my car...
right as a gust of Dorian wind blows my dress up and reveals my entire nethers to a crowd of 8-10 people
I manage to cover my fronts-bits and another gust exposes my rump
I got back in my car and went home
That'll teach me not to go commando
 Edit- Thanks kind stranger for my award
 Also fixed my last sentence for clarity
Thanks for pointing it out.
No smoking for almost a month
I've wanted to quit smoking for a while now
I tried quitting cold turkey, tried lowering the number of cigarettes by one every two days etc
Nothing worked
Had a vacation recently and I went home
My city is really small
So if I smoke there someone I know would likely see and possibly tell my parents
To avoid disappointing my parents I don't smoke when I'm home
So one week later I come back
There's still a force trying to pull me to the store to get my daily hit
Except today the force is weak
I try not smoking and somehow I make it through the day
A few days go by and I have somehow not smoked in 24 days
I wasn't planning to quit smoking this time around and in fact I didn't even try
But now that I have a chance, I'm not gonna smoke ever again
I really wanted to tell someone so here you go guys.
Shoutout to everyone who’s been making progress that no one recognizes because theyre not things you typically mention to others.
Transformation is important and I am proud of every single one of you, no matter how insignificant it may seem
Life is a lesson and you are the independent variable.
After 10 years of being disabled from brain surgery, I am going on my first job interview today.
I was told after having my left temporal and occipital lobes removed in 2011 that I would most likely never be able to hold a job, let alone raise my children
It was very hard because I had to relearn a lot of things, but I finally started college in 2015
I was on the lowest level possible with classes, so it took me two and a half years without skipping a semester to get my associates degree
I had a 3.1 GPA
I got my Bachelor's degree in just a year and a half, getting a 3.7 GPA
I was able to get my kids back 2 years after surgery and even took in a foster child that I've adopted
So today is a big step for me and I'm very nervous
Can I please get some wishes for good luck

Update: Thank you everyone for the kind words and message
I am in shock from all of the positive responses
I had my interview a little bit ago and I'm really not sure how I did
I feel like I could have failed it just because I got nervous with words and I did mess some up
However, I'm not going to let this affect me
It just probably means I'm not meant to work there but it's practice for the next job
I won't find out for 2-3 weeks but I'll update as soon as I find out
Thank you guys so much

Update posted on new post today
Thank you everyone for all of the pep talk.
My 9/11 experience
Just need to tell someone.
I was 16.
My dad traveled a lot when I was growing up
We rarely even knew where he was going because it was a weekly occurrence.
I was watching at school and was pulled into the principals office some 45 minutes-hour into the event
They all seemed very empathetic and excessively caring towards me and for the life of me couldn’t figure out why
I was a bit of case so this was out of the ordinary for me.
My mom showed up with both of my grandmas shortly thereafter and told me dad flew into NYC that morning and they weren’t able to get ahold of him
My grandpa (dads dad) had passed in March and 9/11 was his first birthday since passing; so understandably my grandmother was a wreck.
It was as close to an out of body, movie scene, surreal experience as I’ve had...driving home with them wondering if this was it
It was so extreme and far-fetched it almost didn’t bother me
I tried cracking jokes and lightening the mood because I was so uncomfortable and didn’t want to think about it
They didn’t even correct me; I don’t think they even noticed.
We watched at home for what felt like hours and hours but was probably only 45 minutes or so
Each phone ring; we crowded around my mom
Finally, dad called
He was ok
Only then did it hit me
The severity of the situation.
I went outside with our dog and lost my mind
I learned to appreciate my dad in a way that’d I’ve never felt before.
He somehow pulled off a rental car and took 4 people back to our house 4 states away that night, then let them take the car and carry on to their eventual destinations.
A life changer for sure
Hug your dads.
My 2YO daughter said I love you for the first time
Basically what the title says
We were walking around the neighborhood and I say, "Mama loves you." She says, "I wub yew." It melted my heart, especially when she gave me that big ol' grin when she said it
I know she probably doesn't "get it," but it still meant a lot to me
She's my first kid, may very well be my only kid
I still don't know if I'm doing this whole parenting thing right
I didn't exactly have great examples growing up
But 


I don't know
Hearing her say it made me feel like I was maybe doing something right
I hope I am
She's a great kid
(Yes, even at 2 haha.)
Now, if you'll excuse me, I have to go back to crying about this.
I’m waking up to the rain on my window and my two cats kneading and snuggling me.
I just feel so happy, my moody cat is looking at me lovingly and kneading me, while my social butterfly kitty is snuggled under my arm
 The rain is creating a very nostalgic atmosphere from my childhood
I’m  just appreciating my morning and life.
What things bring you out of the slump of day to day stress and appreciate things a little more

I have an anti vax dad and a slightly vaccine hesitant mom and am finally planning to get the shots I missed
Growing up, I have an anti vax dad and a vaccine hesitant mom (she’s better than dad but isn’t quite totally on board with them)
I only got the bare minimum vaccinations and am missing a few shots (such as I never got some booster shots and never got shots for a few diseases)
So now that I’ve been away at college on my own I’m finally able to get vaccinated on my own
 So I plan to make a doctor’s appointment soon to go get them
 Hooray

So I fired one of my employees &...
I fired an employee a couple of days ago after he refused to take a drug test when he had an accident on the forklift (company policy)
I've got him on the cameras screwing around &amp; what looks like him on his cellphone too
The kind of funny thing that happened two days later is that he came back with his mother &amp; they both demanded I give him his job back
They were both genuinely shocked when I told them "no" &amp; showed the camera footage.
"You can't record employees in here
 The owner doesn't allow that
 My son was talking to his fans
"
I'm the owner ma'am &amp; I don't care who your son was talking too..
he's still fired.
(She was still pissed
They both were)
I got engaged last night and haven’t been able to sleep
It was just supposed to be a casual date night that we try to fit in during the week
Then we accidentally stayed up all night talking on our porch and he randomly walks inside, back out and asked me to marry him
He dropped the ring and it almost fell under the porch, he was so nervous and fumbling
Apparently he had a proposal plan for next month but he couldn’t wait anymore
He can’t wait to marry me
I’ve never had anyone love me the way he does
I’ve never loved anyone like this
I get to marry my best friend.
Life really does get better.
Life is really great when you don't have high expectations.
Like
I'm 20
I just started working at taco bell  and like
I'm about to get my first paycheck and I just feel really....okay about my future
Happy
Like, my current state of living is really nice and I just feel good
Idk
I dont plan on doing anything big or crazy ever
I wanna move within the next 5 years
That's it, really
I want to get an apartment
I want to make enough to live in that apartment
Maybe I just haven't been crushed by reality yet.
I plan on going back to college when I decide what I wanna do
I'm not just settling for taco  bell, haha
I'm just happy I can make some of my own money
 Every day I think about career choices and what I'm good at
I was in college for a bit but I was really unmotivated and depressed, so I didn't do well at all.
I have an SO I plan on living with
I dont want kids
I just wanna be a happy fool in love
He's what drives me, haha
Hes my motivation....er, a good portion of it anyway.
If anyone wants some ameture advice, a buddy to talk to, or anything, feel free to hit me up
I love talking to you guys

Also, I apologize for saying "like" a lot
This post was made at 5am and I was VERY tired
I had no idea this would get so much attention and honestly, I'm floored by it.
I'm rambling, but I hope you all have a nice day :) thank you for reading my silly life post.
Day 1 no smoking :/
Honestly already kinda losing my mind
I forgot how hard kicking this really is
All I want to do is go out and have my morning smoke.
but instead I'm posting to you guys

Just got an amazing job offer
I've doubled my salary in two years
Oh and I'm a high school dropout with no degree.
I'm so freaking excited.
I always struggled in school
I've had teachers tell me I was stupid, and classmates tell me I was a waste of space.
I have my GED and some college credits, not even close to a degree.
I started working at minimum wage when I was 18 and moved out of the house with no savings and no plan.
Had three jobs at one point just to make it by.
I've had shoes thrown at my head by angry customers
I've been yelled at and put down by many more.
Clawed my way up to $12.
Negotiated $15 at the next job.
In January of this year I was offered 40k a year, salaried with benefits
Which I had never had before.
I've been really unhappy in my current position but didn't want to leave because it was such a huge pay increase from my last one.
I stood up for a lady on the bus a few weeks ago and pissed off the guy that was harassing her
I take public transit, and while I'm quite introverted on the bus I love to people watch
I usually have headphones in and just peer over my phone and check out conversations, phone screens, weird hats, (yes, I'm "that guy" but I promise it sounds more creepy than it is)
I really enjoy all the different characters
There are lots of regulars, myself included.
There's a guy who tries to sell his bus pass..
on the bus
Which usually gets  him kicked off the bus
There's a guy who refuses to sit down even when the bus is empty and tries to balance without holding onto anything
There's groups of sports fans and groups of kids that are probably way too young to be talking about what they're talking about
And there's Mary
I don't know her real name, because I've never talked to her, but she feels like a Mary
She's probably in her early 70's and is maybe 5 feet tall
She has short curly grey-blonde hair and wears nice matching pant suits, and she has some sort of facial mark
Her eyes were sort of melted shut and half her face was waxy and smooth while the other was red and grey
Super quiet, didn't make eye contact, and kids stared at her constantly.
That was Mary 6 months ago, lately I think she's had some sort of work done because her face looks so different
 She disappeared for a while and now that she's back, she looks happier
She started wearing some makeup too so that might be part of the change, either way I'm happy for her
I really don't want to come across as judge-y and rude, I just needed to point out that I have seen this lady for 4 years and she's been a bit of an outcast in the town.
Back to the story though
When the bus is extraordinarily busy I take out the headphones so I can hear if people need to get behind me or around me to the door, and today was that day
People were packed in like sardines and the bus was full of it's usual characters, including Mary who was right beside me, I'm 20 years old and about a head taller than her
Someone comes down the stairs to the lower level where we're standing and starts talking loudly
He's sort of shaking, hopping from foot to foot
He is in his mid thirties but dressed like and edgy teenager and has the widest eyes I've ever seen; no one should be this excited to be on a bus
NO one
I'm pretty sure he was on something, or coming off something, or maybe he had some stuff going on in his brain that I wasn't equipped to diagnose
He was practically yelling when he sees Mary
He lifts his hands up and puts a hand on her shoulder
I'm paying close attention to him and her face and everyone else on the bus, who are all turning a blind eye.
He's yelling louder about sports and getting drunk and I'm sort of looking at this big guy behind our crazed friend
This guy is 6'5, built like a brick house, and has a lumberjack beard
POLAR OPPOSITE of me, the 5'5 girl trying to get his attention
He looks at me and shuffles backwards then turns around
Alright, cool
Friend is still harassing Mary and I try to make eye contact with him, maybe get his attention onto me and off of her
She's very uncomfortable at this point and holds up her hands as a reaction to him having his arm almost around her
He grabs her hand and squeezes, and she says (the first time I've ever heard her speak in 4 years)
"Please, stop" and he LAUGHS.
Alright, mother fucker
I'm usually pretty introverted but today had been a GOOD day and I wasn't going to let someone else have a bad one
I put my hand on his arm and he looked at me
"Dude, she asked you to stop
Let go." He seemed sort of shocked to hear that, and he let her hand go
Then he took his other hand and put it up to her shoulder again, ignoring me again
"Buddy, fuck right off
Get to the other side of the bus and keep your hands to yourself."
He gives me a cold glare and backs up, turns, and goes to the other side of the bus
No one cared, no one clapped, no one looked at me
Everyone was willing to let this happen to her, and I was a little upset about that
I asked Mary if she was okay and she said that he really hurt her, and I so asked if she wanted me to get her home
She honestly looked like she was going to cry and I don't know if it was from the guy, from me, or just the whole situation
She grasped my hands in hers and thanked me and we got off the bus together
She thanked me and we went our separate ways
I was honestly ready to punch a hole through that guy and I'm glad I didn't have to.
So, yeah
Thanks for reading
I've never told anyone about that before because I don't know how to bring it up without being really weird
It was out of character for me but I've stood up for a few more people since then
I hope Mary is doing good, and I hope that she doesn't run into that guy again.
I just won $100 on a slot machine.
My SO had to wait in a long line for the bathroom, so I put $5 on the Juriassic Park slot machine and won $100
I hardly ever gamble, and to be honest I dont really understand the slot machine rules, but I was really excited to win
 I already spent my winnings on lobster rolls and beers, but I just wanted to tell someone.
I have made it to day 3

Honestly didn't think I'd do it this time but I'm on day 3 of no smoking and I feel pretty good all the way around
Got a good nights sleep woke up did my hair and make up, cleaned the house, got the kids all taken care of
Feel motivated today and just honestly good about life and proud of myself :)
I told the girl who took my coffee order she had pretty nails

I got distracted by the girl’s yellow painted nails while placing my order.I thought about it for a second and decided to compliment her.We don’t compliment people enough.She smiled and said her mother thinks they look ridiculous.I assured her they looked really pretty and it felt nice talking to someone and complimenting them.
I upvote benign comments sitting at 0 or lower such as "Lmao" that usually get downvoted
So what a guy laughed at something, or they had a stupid question, or they misinterpreted the post
Why do people need to downvote just because of that
 Let it sit at 1 people
 Don't push someone down just because they aren't following reddiquette 100%
 Ignore the post, explain what's happening, and clarify the posts meaning
I see so many people sitting at 0 or lower because they just made a comment that wasn't some astute observation, funny one liner, or deep explanation
Some people on here are from different countries, some people suck at communicating through text, and some people just aren't that bright.
And you know what
 That last one irks me a lot
 People are dumb, we're all really, really stupid at points in our lives
Sure you may be smarter than me, but I'm smarter than him, and that other guy is smarter than YOU
 So does it really matter if someone said something stupid
 Like in the grand scheme of things, does it matter
 No, not really
So why mass downvote people
 Why make them feel bad and make snarky comments over a question
 Enlighten them
 That way instead of having 1 stupid person who feels bad, you now have 1 slightly less stupid person who feels good
It just makes sense to me...
3 months



3 months sober so I posted 1 and 2 months sober and my first post has the story you guys showed so much support I had to keep going thank you all for your help
My husband made a lovely post and it made it's way to me
You know how sometimes you scroll through a social media and you see a cute post, in your head you say that's so cute I wish my significant other said things like that, or did stuff like that
Well this time I saw that post and it was for me
I could tell within the first few sentences it was him
 I felt my heart melt, and this post in itself meant the world to me
Some of you might say so what it's just a post but here's a little background
We have been married 5 years and we have a 3 year old and a 1 year old
Needless to say things have been hard
We been stressed by life and it has affected the way we treat each other
So to others this might not mean much but to me it means the world, because he means the world to me
As crazy as this man makes me he also is the best part of me
There is no better husband or father to my children than this man
Yes we all have things we need to work on but I see more than what he currently is, I see the man he could become
I see the good in him even when he thinks he has none.
I cried in the bus yesterday, cause I missed my friend
I took a trip to go see my friend because he was feeling stressed out and depressed in uni
The bus ride is like 11 hours
When I got to his dorm, everything was just good vibes
Met some of his dorm mates and they were all really nice and had a good sense of humour
We all took a tab of acid in his room (pretty much my first time, we had a baby sitter and shit
It was real safe) and devolved into a sludgy love bundle
All just cuddling each other, listening to awesome music, experiencing some cool ass art and just kinda bonding
When we came off the peak, his dorm mates returned to their rooms because it was like 3am or something
Friend and I stayed in his room and took the rest of the trip together, not sleeping and just chilling
We were cracking jokes, listening to our favourite tunes, talking about our feelings and how we are doing.
When morning came, I had to get back on a bus to go home
We hugged, said our goodbyes, I got on the bus, the engine started, the world rumbled, and I started falling away from my friend
A piano sung a cruel song as I shifted a beanie over my eyes and tears quietly streamed down my face.
"I don't know when I'm gonna see him again
I'm leaving and I'm not gonna see him for a while
Shit
I'm crying
", reigning my thoughts.
I didn't hate it
I'm a guy and rarely cry, I'm not particularly sentimental nor do I freely express my sadness, but I miss my friend man
and I love the fact that I do.
Lil bit of an update/add on: Straight up told my boy I missed him
Flicked him a message that wrote "I'm crying on the bus homie and these tears are all for you
Hope you got home safe :)" or something like that
He told me that he was safe and I was a big part of the reason why he felt so happy that day.
Also, I realise that I cried most likely due to the come down of the drug
that shit makes you emotional I get ya, but it wasnt a bad thing
I needed that cry and I needed the validation that I truly loved my friend :)
Thanks for the silver, my dude
Appreciate.
What I learned from walking my dog everyday for a month.
One month ago today, I realised I really wasn't happy with myself as a dog owner, and I decided I wanted to start walking her daily
This may not seem like much of a big deal to most of you, but I've struggled my entire life with doing things I don't feel like doing, and a routine, or any kind of discipline, has been something my life has never had.
So, every single day since, we have done that
If it was raining, we walked
If I had worked all day and then been out the rest of the night with friends, we walked
If it was 3am and I'd just climbed into bed because my dumbass had forgotten to walk her and then suddenly remembered..
We walked.
At the start of the month I really enjoyed the walks
I was keeping up with a goal I had set myself, the exercise and fresh air was nice, and Dawn and I were regaining a bond that we hadn't shared for a long time
I snapchatted our walks everyday - it was fun to do; it kept me in check by giving me a sense of accountability, and I low-key enjoyed showing off all the tricks Dawn has learned over our years together
I quickly grew bored of snapchatting though, and I've pretty much stopped doing it entirely.
Just a short two weeks in, the daily walks began to feel like an incredible burden on me, and I often procrastinated until the very end of the night
Quite a few times we walked well after 2am, even though I started work at 7am that very same morning, and boy did I desperately wish I was able to skip just one day when that happened.
Towards the end of the month, after enduring two weeks of what felt like what I could only describe as being cursed, I started loving the walks again
I began walking during the day again, choosing to walk before I did anything else I wanted to do.
Forcing myself to do something that was important to me, even on the days I didn't want to, has been nothing but life-changing for me
The self-imposed discipline of just this one simple daily act has changed the way I feel about and approach a lot of things in my life, and it's significantly improved my quality of life and the way I feel about each day
I'm beginning to dedicate myself more and more to the things that are important to me, and I actually feel like I can achieve the things I want from life, as long as I put in that little bit of effort each day.
I know I droned on about something very simple that doesn't actually seem like a big deal, but what I learned from walking my dog every day is this: If you have something that is important to you in life, and you take the time to work on it each and every day, no matter the costs or the obstacles - you will eventually see the improvements you wish to achieve.
It's up to you to decide whether it's important enough to you to do it, or whether you're just going to keep making excuses for yourself.
I just got a $15,000 promotion




This is my first time posting here, but idk I’m feeling good right now and want to share some inspiration for anyone else out there.
So I work for NY state in an office building, and I’ve been a laborer there for the past five years
I do things like mail, office supply orders for regional offices, setting up new employees, keeping Xerox’s running, cleaning and maintaining fleet vehicles, etc
I’m basically everyone’s bitch—but I love it because I’m not stuck at my desk all day
If you need a fleet vehicle shoveled out of the snow, I got you
If you need a new light bulb, I got you
If you need someone to get in touch with IT, I got you
If you need a new case of blue binders, i got you
I’m always out running around for everyone, but for some reason I love it
The pay is pretty bad, I only make $31,000 a year, but I get amazing benefits and healthcare and all that so that makes it worth it
I’m the lowest paid person in my building of 450+ workers, and it’s not really even close.
So as a backstory, I kinda lucked my way into the place I’m at five years ago, I never finished getting my degree and I didn’t need to test to get into my initial position (as you do with most state jobs)
My mother told me to go interview for a state job that she heard about and I sorta just nailed the interview by pure luck
I was chosen despite never having a “real” job or any office experience before
(I made and delivered pizzas from 16-24 years old)
But, over the past five years, people seem to really like me and notice me working my ass off all the time
I’m the one who’s always running around the building doing random shit and dealing with the hundreds of workers face to face
So everyone knows me and everyone really has nothing but great things to say about me lol it’s actually really cool how much they all love me
And when I say I’m running around a lot at work, I mean I average 8.5 miles a day just from 7:30-3:30
Like I’m really always running around.
So yesterday, my boss called me into his office and told me that he’s giving me a promotion on recommendation of all the executives and higher ups—which is insane
The number one and two head hanchos in my agency nudged my boss to give me a promotion that increases my salary 50%



My salary is moving from $31,000 a year to $47,000 a year
With the new job comes new responsibilities, but I’ve been slowly learning and doing these new tasks over the past year or so
But it’s just so cool to finally get paid off for all of the hard work I’ve done.
Like when I’m out shoveling at work or doing some shitty task, I’m cool with it—it’s my job—I just throw on some headphones and listen to a podcast or book
When people come up to me while I’m doing it and offer me coffee or something, I almost always refuse, but just the gesture means everything to me
Seeing my boss’ bosses walk by me and just simply notice me working my balls off and acknowledge it feels good enough to me—but now they’ve just given me a massive break and it means everything to me
 Like it’s cliche as fuck, but my hard work finally paid off—literally.
I’m sorry for the long rant lol
But to anyone out there who has a shit job or feels like they aren’t as successful as everyone else is
Like you’ve always been good, but not good enough to finish that last year of college, or get that really good job you interviewed for, etc...just keep working
Do you, and do it with a smile on your face
People will notice that and it goes a long way
Someday it may pay off for you
 I will still be everyone’s bitch at work, but I’ll be making more money than many of them are now
 Lol
Always go to court for your ticket
Always
I recently got pulled over for expired tags
The car I was driving is mine, but I don’t operate it regularly
My tags were -get this- 2 and a half years expired
The officer told me that technically she should make me get out and have my car towed to my house, but she let me drive it home.
I renewed my tags the next day
I figured out how much the ticket was..
$250
I wasn’t really excited about paying that, so I put it off until my court date
I had never been in court before so I was really unreasonably nervous
I was terrified of court
I was afraid that the judge would force me to pay the ticket AND court costs.
Everyone that went before me was ridiculously unprofessional
Wearing T shirts and jeans in court, calling the judge “bro” and trying to speak over him
When it’s my turn, I come up the podium, suit and tie, with all my paperwork, running through my defense in my head.
I was prepared to tell the judge about how I don’t typically drive this car and the tags just slipped my mind, hoping he would at least reduce the ticket price.
He said “good morning” and stated what time I was pulled over, the officer that pulled me over, and the date my tags expired along with the date I was ticketed
He asked if I renewed my tags, and I said yes
I showed him the paperwork
He started laughing “and you renewed the vehicle registration the very next day”
He went on to “commend” me for taking swift action on my expired registration and dropped the charge at no cost to me.
I learned now that you should always go to court and just be courteous and truthful to the judge
Generally the result will be more favorable
Something funny happened between my girlfriend and I yesterday
So yesterday my gf and I were laying in bed and getting ready to hit the hay
We were talking about what it must have been like to live in the Ice Age
 I went on to talk about all the different types of huge and scary animals (megafauna) that lives during that time
I said “Yeah there were even giant sloths that could kill you” And she was like “what

 No way” So I’m like “yeah lemme show you” So I get on my phone, and I look up: “Ice Age sloth”
And you know what pops up


 Fucking Sid the fucking sloth from Ice Age, the movie
I got trolled so hard
It was funny because when I first googled it and saw the immediate result of Sid the sloth, there was a solid millisecond where my brain was trying to understand what just happened
I just thought I’d share that
It may not be as funny as I think it is, but you might like it.
My 2.5yo son is a late taker
Three months ago he could only say 5 words, but he’s been picking up steam over the last couple months and today he said 4 new words in one day


Basically title
My son has been in speech therapy 1-2 times a week since he turned 2, but even that didn’t seem to help much
Over the last 8 weeks he’s finally been increasing his vocabulary..
he’s still way behind but any progress feels exhilarating
Today he said four new words which is huge for us

 I’m so happy
We’ve been so worried, but things finally seem to be turning around.
A 13 year old asked me if I was a bodybuilder and it made me forget my insecurities for a moment
I play volleyball as a hobby and last week I played with my coach's younger group.
I hit it off really well with them, they're young but they actually understand my humor, which consists of sarcasm and irony 80% of the time.
So anyways, practice was fun, we had some really great rallies and time just flew
Before I knew it we were back in the changing room and there I chatted with the coach and changed my clothes.
One thing you have to know about me is I've been really insecure about my body my whole life, up until a few months ago when I finally noticed some change after hitting the gym for a few years and not stuffing my face with food
Nowadays I can even get changed in front of people, incredible right

 But I'm still kinda self conscious.
I pulled off my shirt and then a 13 year old boy asked me if I was a bodybuilder lmFao
Obviously, because I can't handle positive feelings, I laughed at him and said "What
 Uhh no I'm not wtf lol" and quickly put on my stuff.
But it did lowkey feel kinda good, having a teenager think that I'm a bodybuilder after struggling my whole life with my body image does kinda relieve the stress and it honestly put my mind at ease for a minute.
Tl;dr A teenager thought I'm a bodybuilder and it made me feel good about my fat ass
FYI, I'm 18.
I got into medical school

I have been following this subreddit for a few years
I never commented, mostly because I never had anything to say
I just up voted everyone's posts because your achievements and small victories always made my day
But yeah, I got into my top choice medical school
I'm in shock
I don't know what to do next
I might celebrate by taking a nap
Crying gave me a headache.
Best hug I've had in years.
I had a wonderful experience today
An Uber driver picked me up and took me from my hotel down to a store where I wanted to pick up a few beers and something to eat in my hotel that doesn't come from room service or the bar
It was just before 6 am (I'm a regular visitor to the country from a timezone where 6 am here is 3 pm for me at home)
In casual conversation I asked him if he had just started work for today
He replied that he'd been up all night and had to work until he'd made another $75
His rent is due today.
Anyway, he waited whilst I bought my beer and food
I paid the cashier and on the way out noticed a cash machine at the door
One of those that you have to draw cash in $20 bills
I don't know what I was thinking but $75 isn't that much money that you can't help a fellow human being out
I drew $80.
When he dropped me off I asked him if I could tip him in cash rather than on the Uber app and of course he was okay with that
When he saw the money he started crying
It was a $10 ride
He got out of the car with me and gave me a hug
He wouldn't let me go for the longest and most beautiful hug I've had in years.
I said, "Go get some sleep bro."
Sleep tight Alvin.
I quit smoking for good
A little background: I started smoking at 13(Bad parents, easy accessibility, long story) and smoked almost daily until I was 17 before beginning this on again/off again relationship with smoking for the following 3 years.
So for the past 3 years I've been trying to quit but I kept getting back into it
So a few months ago I bought a vape thinking it would help me quit, but it made it sooo much worse because I could vape indoors without my landlord noticing so it became excusable to me to be smoking constantly for the better part of every single day.
After two weeks of this I started reconsidering and I realized that vaping was not helping me quit, nor was it a good substitute, because I was actually vaping more than I was smoking previously.
So two nights ago i threw that stupid fucking vape away and am going to seriously quit
And not because it's the healthy choice or because someone wants me to quit, but because smoking does not make me happy
It never has
Now I'm done with it, for good.
I'm irritable, my throat hurts and breathing sucks but despite that, I'm happy with this step forward that I'm taking
But I have absolutely no one to share this with so to whoever reads this; thank you
The Problem with Immortality
So you've become immortal
Perhaps it was an accident involving a few rubber bands, a liquid lunch, and a particle accelerator
It doesn't really matter, it's done now
You now have to spend the rest of your life (ha) figuring out what to do with yourself.
At first you do all the dangerous stuff
Hang gliding, cave diving, crack cocaine, etc
You start stabbing yourself at the local bar as a trick to get free drinks
But you're running out of clean shirts that don't have knife holes in them.
You briefly dabble with thoughts of becoming a superhero, but crime never seems to just happen in front of you, and going out and looking for it is just so much work you guys

You start investing for the long term
You're going to be around forever, what does 5% annual compound interest of $1 look like after 1000 years

Oh god, you're going to live forever
What does that even mean

You've got some time to kill, so start a hobby that'll take decades or centuries to finish
Then start a new one
Go to university to study physics and take a few hundred years to discover the quantum-gravitational theory, aka the Universal Theory of Everything
Then master every musical instrument and write a symphony, or 10
Then start doing crossword puzzles
You have time to do it all.
Don't develop close feelings for people
They'll all die, but you'll endure, and funerals are depressing (and for you, unnecessary).
You can have kids
Lots of kids
But you'll start losing track of them
They only really keep in touch for a few decades
And then they'll have kids and those kids will have kids and eventually you'll lose track of it all
Family doesn't have much meaning anymore once you have a billion or so family members but they all forgot that it was your birthday last Tuesday.
Realize that you'll outlive all of your enemies, you can afford to ignore them and just wait
 Why worry about anything, really
Climate change might make things uncomfortably hot, but you'll endure
The entire banking system may collapse trying to fund the interest on $1 deposited a thousand years ago, but eventually it will recover and you'll be there when it does.
If you want to, you can rule a country
After all, they can't kill the despotic dictator if the despotic dictator can't die
They can lock you up, but eventually all jails crumble, all regimes change.
I've decided to stop smoking weed permanently.
I used to smoke weed occasionally back in uni but nowadays I've become a heavy user of the drug, I've decided to quit permanently and this decision came as a result of armed robbers breaking into my room with guns and I can't help but think it was because I was stoned that night that was why I wasn't conscious that they had been in two other neighbours room prior, they broke down the door to my own flat  and I still wasn't aware until they got into my room, and that was the point where I woke, barely aware of what was going on (I still thought it was a dream)
It's been a good one week and I  haven't touched weed since then, my anxiety is over the roof but I've vowed never to use a device again.
Thanks to those with kind words.
I bought a pumpkin for £20 and made it into a huge Cheshire Cat
 He’s beautiful and I love him
Happy Halloween everyone


My daughter's thrift store Joker costume, I think we nailed it.
I made it through the week without a single thought that triggers my anxiety



I have been waking up every single day to anxious thoughts since the start of September due to some issues in my life (like no kidding i wake up TO them, it fucking sucks)
I am so happy with myself; I’ve honestly forgotten how this feels like
I am finding myself constantly bringing a specific ‘thought’ that triggers my anxiety, worried that it might just be a fluke that im not feeling anxious, but getting pleasantly surprised everytime when I realise that it isn’t affecting me like it used to.
Things really do get better with time you guys
This is just baby steps but I feel like I am finally in control of my mind and starting to be able to let go of things and thoughts and people and focus on myself instead



Salman Khan from Khan Academy should receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom within his lifetime
I mean if Ellen can get it (nothing against Ellen), shouldn't he
 Imagine how many lives he's affected through his free education platform
Not only was he one of the first to make free educational videos, but he's consistently the best at it
He has a true skill for boiling down concepts into an understandable form.
I think it would be a real shame if he doesn't receive this award - it's the highest honor a civilian can receive and he's truly deserving of it.
I just wanted to share that I have a good feeling about today

I don't know why, but I'm feeling so good this morning
I just feel very positive and upbeat, which is not how I usually am
We have a new kid at work coming in for his first shift today and I'm so excited
 We only have 4 people  (5 counting my manager) working at our store because it's a small business, so we're all very close and we're all super excited to welcome someone into our little family
I love Fall &amp; Winter so I'm just thriving in the cold weather
I don't know, guys
I just feel happy right now
(:
Looking for more in-depth discussion on heavier topics
 Check out our sister sub - it's like this sub but more serious..
r/SeriousConversation
I was helping him with housework when I noticed him on the top rung of an old ladder
So I stuck around just in case
That’s when he fell and I was in the perfect position
I consider this an absolute win considering I’m not a big dude, 5’9 140lbs, and my dad weighs about 20lbs heavier than me
 I know, I know I’m cool thanks :)
I just figured out a guitar solo on my own based on a dream i had



Hi
 I've been learning the guitar for two years now and i was having these doubts over my practice sessions (you can see my last post on      r/guitar) and i went to sleep thinking about all those insights i had just got
I had a couple of dreams, some disturbing and some pleasant
And it just so happened that i had a dream with Bohemian Rhapsody playing in the background with the electric guitar solo being highlighted and since it's a dream, i could see myself playing it with all the slides and bends
Few hours after i wake up, i try playing the solo that came in my dream
It's worth mentioning that I've never tried it out though I've heard it a lot of times


 And guess what
 I got the whole thing in 5 minutes


 It made my day for a while
I hate being pregnant.
Honestly, I don’t understand woman who say things like”I miss being pregnant” “I loved being pregnant” did you
 Like did you really because personally this shit sucks.
There’s one thing I can say about this it’s just the fact that my body is able to and I’m very grateful
My aunts has issues conceiving and it breaks my heart.
However
The giant belly stretching my once beautiful skin make it physically impossible to get comfy enough to sleep
The back pain that leaves me unwilling to get up to get a snack because of the CONSTANT hunger
The need to pee every 20 mins but also the need to constantly drink water because gum pain


 WTF Or my person favorite
THOSE FAKE ASS CONTRACTIONS BC WHY NOT
fuck You body
I don’t need to be prepared for labor
I need to just go in and get it over with
The lovely fear of walking to far or working out to hard because you pee yourself now
The indigestion no matter what you eat
Sugar
 Burn
Anything acidic or spicy
 Burn
Exhaustion but also panicking because you only have 36 onesies and 4 pacifiers
Because yaknow
You need at least a pacifier per room in your house
Those kicks that were cute at first but now you actually fear them bursting on of your lungs
God that pain is weird
And last but not least
Everyone thinking it’s okay to touch your stomach..
I’m still a human being guys
Stop rubbing my belly like I’m a fucking teddy bear.
Well if there’s one good thing
I have a month left and still no swollen feet
Sorry my poor boyfriend is probably so done with hearing me bitch.
I’m always amazed by how much a movie can have an effect on simple, ordinary phrases like “I’ll be back.”
I saw “Joker” recently and now I forever hear the phrase, “You get what you fucking deserve.” In Arthur Fleck’s tone of voice
I’m sure people have said “You get what you fucking deserve” before the movie but now I feel like that phrase has changed forever in meaning
Same goes with “I’ll be back.” Before Terminator I’m sure people said it normally but after the movie, if anyone said it, they would get some kind of different reaction.
Movies really affect out language and how we hear certain phrases and exclamations.
After four years, I’m pretty much pain free
About four years ago, I started getting this weird pain in the back of my head
It felt like a knot or a rock where my skull met my spine, and it radiates our like a tree
When it first started, it completely knocked me on my ass
I would be completely useless and have to go to bed and hope that it would be gone when I woke up
Within a few weeks, that didn’t work, and I had this pain in the back of my head that wrapped around to my temples and it just wouldn’t go away.
I saw a neurologist, who told me it was a migraine, even though it had no migrainous features, and then exercise induced headaches, even though it was literally always there
I tried a couple different classes of medications, to no avail
I did start doing acupuncture, which helped a little, and I developed a routine of sucking it up for 3 days, crashing for one, and then lather rinse repeat
Thankfully I have historically had flexible hours/workspace.
Two years ago, a doctor friend said “hey it sounds like you have occipital neuralgia”, so I went to a pain management doctor who specializes in head and neck issues
He agreed that it sounded like occipital neuralgia and confirmed with a local nerve block in the office
When I left  his office, I broke down in my car because for the first time in two years I had a name for my pain.
Because I had already tried a few medications, the next step was to partially destroy the damaged nerve in a procedure called radio frequency ablation
It’s an outpatient procedure, but to get it covered by my insurance, they had to verify the affected nerves by doing several more intense nerve blocks in a surgery suite (I’m still not super sure what the difference is, except my copays were for “surgery”, and they did about 20 injections in my neck and surrounding nerves while I was awake, twice)
Two months later, I got to have about a dozen nerve endings destroyed using RFA, over two different procedures
It hurt like a bitch, but I figured it would be worth it.
And while the RFA did help with my daily pain a little (down from a 6 to a 4) and reduced my flare frequency and intensity, i still had daily pain
After about 6 months we stopped expecting it to improve
My surgeon offered to go back in and do some more nerves but it didn’t seem worth it based on the time and copays involved
Plus I had learned to deal with my pain without daily medication and with lifestyle modification
It seemed as good as it was going to get.
And then two months ago I went to a new neurologist because I was running low on my flare medication
I didn’t want to go back to the person who misdiagnosed me so I went to someone my husband had seen for a different issue
I told him my diagnosis, the procedures I’d had done, and brought my MRIs
He asked if I had tried various medications, and I had
Then he asked if I had tried a different drug, and would I be willing to try it
Sure, why not.
And oh my god
Within a few days, I could feel a difference, and it kept getting better
My first thought in the morning is no longer “ow”
 I can run without it causing a flare.
At first I thought I felt lightheaded, but I realized that’s what a head now ground down by pain feels like
And on a slightly higher dose that I started recently, I now am pain free for more than half of my day
The remaining pain I feel is really localized in a place that’s easier to ignore.
My husband and my friends are happy for me, but I don’t think they really comprehend how grateful and amazed I feel
I feel like I rediscovered what it feels like to be in my body and I am so unbelievably happy I’m on the verge of tears when I think about it
I didn’t expect this to work so well, and all I really wanted was my usual Rx for flares
But instead I got my life back.
Day of the dead
I wanted to wish my fellow Mexican redditors a happy day of the dead

 Today is such a beautiful and colorful day
Hope your loved ones have a good time celebrating today
May your ofrendas be colorful and delicious (we usually give food)
I hate instant messaging
IMs like Facebook messenger and WhatsApp have created this culture where everyone expects you to respond immediately
If there is even a slight delay, they get offended that you are not considering them to be important enough.
I mean what’s up with that
 Sometimes I don’t want respond because I’ve been trying to escape the world and I don’t feel like talking at all
Unlike you people who are comfortable with people, it takes me literally hours/days to gather courage to reply to all the messages.
Anyways, sorry about the rant
I’m stuck in a situation that requires me to message a lot and I’ve not been handling it well.
I'm happy I stopped vaping.
Former vape god here
Started as a sophomore in college for shits and giggles; had a big battery, Smok Cloud Beast tank, and loads of juices
Got into the Juul when it was big
Had a hookah in my living room and my buddies and we would smoke it like animals.
Fast forward a bit and I was able to walk away from all of it without much of an afterthought
The flavors were tasty (Juul mango is forever imprinted in my brain as the best flavored anything ever), but the potential adverse side effects were enough for me to walk away.
My mom put it best
I unconsciously whipped out my Blu vape and hit it to her dismay, and after the yelling and nagging she told me plainly: "I get working at night and being alone all day can be stressful, but you really don't want that stuff in your lungs."
And that's all it really was
My wired mind needed something to fidget with on long overnight shifts, and really between moments of anxiety.
If anyone out there wants to kick the stuff, I believe in you
My mom believes in you too.
Put an offer on a house last night, this morning it got accepted

Very excited, I'm 25 and this is my first time buying a house
Kind of nervous since I know the rest of it after this will be less fun than looking at the houses, but I think it's a good move for myself, my SO and our pets.
Started paying for people’s coffees
I’m 18 M and I have never got my coffee paid for before, so the last two times I have paid for people’s coffee and I always feel great after, seeing people’s happy faces because I made their day brings a lot of value to my life.
Just passed an avionics apprenticeship assessment test for General Atomics

It's only a first step, now I have to wait for them to contact me if they want to hire me
They build the (in
)famous predator drone
I'm really excited, I've loved aviation my whole life and now I may get a chance to work on some of the coolest flying tech out there

Could giving myself more things to do decrease procrastination

I’ve been wondering, what are yall's thoughts on the idea that you can effectively manage time better by increasing the number of tasks to do
The idea is that if you increase the number of tasks to do, you'll be forced to spend more time doing them rather than procrastinate
The punishments for procrastinating a larger number of tasks would be larger and could serve as a sort of deterrent to putting work off.
For example, if I’m only in 4 classes I’ll have just enough free time to trigger my mind to procrastinate but if I was in 6 classes would the pressure on me basically force me to stop procrastinating and manage my time better

I'm really sorry if the explanation is a bit poor but I’m interested to hear everyone's thoughts on this.
Last night I heard one of the most pure comments from someone who wasn't a kid
My girlfriend (22) and I were laying on her bed, listening to music and talking
The album was The 59 Sound by The Gaslight Anthem
Its very easy-going music, but kind of upbeat
After a few songs my girlfriend says, "This song makes me want to spin in circles." I had a pretty good chuckle at that, and it warmed my heart.
I could completely picture a little girl joyously 'dancing' to a song she liked by spinning in circles
I'm pretty sure I saw this very thing at a wedding one time.
What are some comments that you have heard someone say
 I'm mostly looking for comments that were made by adults, but if anyone has some cute comments that a kid made, by all means share it.
I got this sudden urge to make a documentary
After watching "Paris is Burning" I've been thinking about making a documentary
Not a really huge, big budget blockbuster
Just a casual thing, with maybe my phone camera or something a bit better.
I really don't have a story to tell
I've just been thinking about how teens like myself live in the city, and how I'd like to show it to the world
It could be a bit boring, but I really like the idea of going around my school and asking people a few questions, like "What do you wanna do in the future
" or "What is your favorite thing to do
".
I was also thinking about adding shots of my neighborhood, filming the places I love the most
I don't know, I feel like have a desire to capture my reality.
I’m the second oldest of 17 children.
Having such a huge family, I have lived a very different life than most here
I’m 21 years old, so it’s not like my parents come from a generation where this is more ‘normalized’
The closest family I’ve ever met that came close to us had 8 children.
My parents are both Christians, but by no means are they extremist or ‘Duggar’ like, despite the similarity of having an abundance of children
My great grandfather was an oil tycoon in the early 20th century and his wealth was passed down to future generations, making it rather easy for my parents to start a family this big without having to worry about finances.
When I was 6, we moved into a beautiful 10 bedroom waterfront home in upstate NY
I moved out three years ago to attend university
I still keep in daily touch with my parents &amp; all 16 of my siblings.
When I tell people about my family, they assume I’ve been brainwashed or that I’m not capable of ‘relating’ to the average Joe
I’m here to say that it couldn’t be further from the truth
If anything, growing up in such a large family has taught me how to deal with all the different personalities that people have
It’s also amazing to have such a big support system and know that each and every single one of my siblings is always their for me, just as I’m always there for them.
I fucking crushed the toast at my best friend’s wedding
I’m on a flight coming back from the wedding
Work is going to suck tomorrow but I don’t care.
I met my friend when we were assigned to be random roommates, and he got married to the most amazing woman ever yesterday
He asked to give a toast at the reception and I was honored, but I’d seen a lot of terrible speeches and the payoff for good ones is minimal
It’s tough to fit all your emotions in 3 minutes and I’m a bit of a rambler, so I prepared for about an hour last week.
Day of the wedding comes and I’m an absolute wreck
I was just staring at the Notes app on my phone throughout the dinner thinking about how it was going to go wrong, especially since the Maid of Honor’s toast was flawless
I just wanted to get in and out with no disasters so that at the very least, there could be friendly applause and we can move on.
I got up there and stuck to the format that I had, with casual no-risk laughs at the beginning with a little more heart at the end
But then when I looked at their eyes and saw how beautiful their love is and how much they mean to me, I broke down crying as I was saying that they’re the best thing that happened to me in college
They both got up and swarmed me as they started crying
I looked out and many others crying as well
I want to bottle that feeling up forever
A tremendous weight was lifted off my shoulders in addition to the love I felt
Another friend took me directly to the bar for the shot and I had a night I’ll never forget.
Making a grocery list is too difficult.
I wish there was some newsletter, or app or something that would suggest a nutritionally sound weekly set of dinners, and the grocery lists and recipes that would go along with it
If that is not a thing, I feel like it would be a hit.
Today I was in shock after finding out that the triplets in Ducktales are called Huey, Dewey and Louie in english instead of Tick Trick and Trak like in german
So today I was babysitting as usual and we watched and old halloween themed episode of Disney's house of mouse (called mickeys clubhouse in german which is btw the best freaking disney cartoon show)
Well there was a scene where there were tomb stones of the boys and the names were Huey, Dewey and Louie
At exactly that moment I realized that my 21 years if existence were a lie
I quickly googlged them and confirmed there names
I grew up knowing them as Tick, Trick and Track because thats how they are namend in german.
It still blows my mind
My life if a freaking lie.
Does anyone else have an intense fear of an automatic door closing on them

One time in Rome I had the train station ticket door close on me, and I think it triggered something
So now I walk through all automatic things really fast and hope I make it haha

I feel like kind of an asshole because I want all my belongings.
Ok so the title is a bit confusing but i'm not sure how else to word it.
I live in a fairly rich area however I am on the lower income side of things
One of my friends borrows some clothes occasionally and will often keep it for a while
 I usually wouldn't mind but because I am not that wealthy, new clothes are a little more rare for me than the friend that borrows them
The friend that borrows them will lend me clothes but i'll return them within the week
How do I go about asking her to return my clothes quickly because my supply of clothes are limited

I feel like I’m wasting my life as a uni student
I’m a 2nd year marine bio student and I’ve spent the last year and a bit with just no motivation and my uni life is just being wasted
I’m not really in any clubs, I did some hiking last year but lost interest, I’ve tried getting into the scuba and Trpg clubs but just can’t
I’ve got no passion or motivation for my subject
I only really started the course caused I needed something to do.
My husband won’t recreate what made him look exactly like shrek so I can take a picture and use it to make me laugh when I’m feeling down
So my husband got some new air pods so he can his phone wirelessly and he didn’t know how to put them in and had them sticking out from his head at right angles and he looked at me quizzically and looked SO MUCH LIKE SHREK that I laughed so hard I had tears and couldn’t see through them to quickly turn on my phone camera and now he won’t recreate it for me....
I’m donating my eggs.
I don’t know if this is necessarily the right spot for this post but I just wanted to tell someone other than my husband who hears me talk all the time
I decided to donate my eggs
Originally it was for the financial compensation which, to be honest, isn’t too shabby
But when I started looking more and more into it, I became invested in helping strangers have a baby they wouldn’t have under other circumstances
I could literally go on and on and on and on about my son and how amazing he is and how much I love him and I want another woman to be able to have that too
It’s completely anonymous so I’ll never know the people who get my eggs and they’ll never know me, other than what’s on my donor profile, which I’m okay with
I’m really excited about doing this
Just wanted to share.
Today was the first time a tattoo artist has posted a picture of a tattoo they did on me on their instagram, and it’s one of my stupidest tattoos to date
I follow a lot of local tattoo artists on Instagram; I follow more artists than I do people I know
Every time I get a tattoo I secretly kind of wish the artist who made the tattoo would like it enough to post it on their social media pages, but none of them ever has before
Not even the guy who did my dinosaur skulls, which are really cool
The artist who did the tattoo I got yesterday posted it, though, and it’s gotten quite a few likes.
It’s an ear of corn
I got a tattoo of an ear of corn, and the artist who made the tattoo elected to publicize that
I’m not mad, I think it’s funny, it’s just crazy to me.
Currently experiencing the existential crisis I get every time immediately following a tattoo
Please help ease it.
The luxury that is a comfortable bed
People talk about luxuries – fancy car, vacation, expensive what not
The luxury of a comfortable bed honestly doesn’t get enough credit
You don’t need to spend an incredible amount of money to have an exquisitely comfortable bed, but it makes a world of difference in terms of day-to-day quality of life.
My Cat Came Back Today
This boi (indoor/outdoor) was gone 9 DAYS...in the middle of a cold snap
He's never been gone that long
He is one of my Best Friends.
I thought for sure some crazy cat lady in the neighborhood decided to adopt him without checking with animal services
He's gone away for a couple days here and there, but never this long
I knew this was different.
I was preparing to go Liam Neeson on my neighbors
Go door to door
Take notes
Offer a stupid amount of money for his return
I was getting angry
I refused to grieve, but I was resigning myself to start and accept he wasn't coming back if my efforts didn't work.
Then, today, my husband and I were chilling, getting ready to start the day and find him once and for all...
And THWACK something hit the bedroom window
Only Helios does that
When he wants in.
We raced to the door, he ran in, smelling like dirt, about 5 pounds lighter, with attitude
He JUMPED into my arms and then, after a moment, made a beeline for food and water
I'm pretty sure he spent at least 48 hours walking back home from...wherever he was.
I gave him so many treats and he wandered around the house for awhile sniffing everything before absolutely passing out in front of the heater.
I don't know where he's been, or what he went through coming back, but I'm so proud of him
He's the best cat
I knew he would come back to me.
Some questions
Hey, I hope things are going well for you :) if they aren't hopefully at least you are in power to change them yourself.
You get to choose a pill that fixes one very oddly specific thing about yourself
What does it fix

What have you been consuming(it can be food, movies, books, music, podcasts, etc) lately that you have really loved

What is something you have been tinkering with in that noggin of yours

When people talk about you what do you want them to say

What do you wish you got to talk about more

What do you wish you got to listen about more

How much do you spend on your work lunch a week

I've recently tried sticking to a tighter budget when it comes to lunch food now
I like to mix it up a bit but I've gotten bored of just eating sandwiches everyday which seems to be the cheapest option
I've set myself a limit of 20 pound a week (extra skint because I'm on apprenticeship wage for the next year, £3.90 an hour)
How much do you spend and what do you eat

Workout
What's good excercises for someone who hasn't worked out since high school
I'm trying to have a healthier body  during and after my pregnancy 

I composed a piece, had it performed at my school, and it was a huge success

A little while back, my orchestra teacher approached me and asked if I wanted to perform something on the next concert
I said yes, but said I wanted to perform one of my own pieces
He enthusiastically said yes, and so I started composing something.
It took me a couple days, but I came up with a short waltz for flute and piano
It has a Broadway feel to it; essentially, it’s very upbeat.
After performing it, the audience gave me a standing ovation and cheered loudly
I just couldn’t believe it
It was such a simple piece.
For years, I was alone, stuck in a house with no friends to hang out with
And now, I’m standing in front of people who think I’m worth something.
Sometimes a little encouragement puts things in perspective
It sure changed my perspective.
I'm trying to convince Mom to name our next dog Thorin, middle name Oakenshield.
We're getting a new dog next year
It's a Great Weimar, a Weimaraner crossed with a Great Dane, and we're hoping for a blue boy.
Now, both of us love Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit
I'm currently trying to convince Mom to name the new dog Thorin, since they're both majestic, and the name just sounds awesome
She's arguing for Yoda, but that wouldn't make sense because Yoda sounds more like a name for a really small dog, like a schnauzer or something
(I get the irony because Thorin's a dwarf, but whatever.)
Anyone have any ideas on how to convince her

Data entry job interview

I’m pretty excited
I’ve been jobless for 2 months since the company I worked for closed down
I’m sooooo nervous though because I’ve only ever done customer service and have 0 knowledge of data entry
I know my way around Microsoft word and excel though
Nervous of the questions they are going to ask or maybe I won’t get it due to my lack of education since a pre-requisite was bachelors degree and I have none.
Either way, I made it to an interview which is the farthest I’ve ever gotten these past few months
I couldn’t figure out why but I redid my resume and I realized that must have been it.
Wish me luck
 Also any advice on data entry would be cool.
Proof That I Am Goofy
In the 90's my hubby got me a dvd player and tv
I put these in the studio where I would watch movies when I worked and after the boys went to sleep
Sometimes the little disc thingy on the dvd player would just open for no apparent reason and it took me a long time to find out what it was
A neighbors garage door opener would make it open
I laughed over this for a while because I was beginning to think the dvd player was haunted
Then one morning I was looking out my back door while drinking coffee and I got the bright idea to aim my dvd player remote at the neighbors garage door and see if it would open.
I did.
I watched in horror as the garage door opened.
I went into panic mode
I began trying to make the garage door close with the remote and it wasn't working
How was I going to explain this
 Should I call my neighbors at their work and tell them how stupid I am
 That was exactly what I had to do...
Then the neighbors pulled their car out of their garage and left as the garage door closed
They had activated their garage door at about the same time I pushed the remote.
I was very relieved that I wouldn't have to tell my neighbors about my stupidity.
Will I die of sugar overload
(srs)
I don’t know anything about how many candy bars you can eat without getting sick but I was just vibing when I woke up and went straight for the milky ways, 100 grand bars, twix, and snickers
Minutes later I ate 15 fun size candy bars total
What’s gonna happen to me
 Am I gonna feel sick
 Sugar high

I have a low GPA and I have heard that it is going to find work when I graduate as an accounting major.
Anyone here studying accounting right now
 How much would a bad GPA hinder career opportunities

I have under a 3.0 GPA, and I heard that is pretty much the kiss of death for many college graduates.
I live in the U.S right now.
Till 15 days ago, i had severe anxiety by thinking about a situation whether it will turn out good or bad and i couldn't concentrate on anything
I spent the last week by expecting a good thing that i surely know will turn out good and just spent the days living in the future....
....Today, I have nothing to expect in near future and just enjoying a show in Nat Geo Wild
Not expecting anything whether it is good or bad is just a peaceful and underestimated feeling.
...Sorry for clumsy writing
If you haven't understood something/anything, feel free ask.
Just got married and I feel great

I just got married two days ago and we are on a trip to St Maarten
We have known each other for a few years and now she has my last name
I have never been so happy and, on top of that, have not been so relaxed in the past 3 years
I have a high stress job and yesterday when we go here I noticed I felt very strange
I thought I was sick, then I realized it was just the fact that I am not stressed at all and have time to forget about my job for a while
We can just enjoy the warmth and each other’s company.
My kids went and vaccinated themselves
After years of taking my kids to get their flu shots, sometimes kicking and screaming...I totally forgot about it this year because we were so busy
 I get a call from the pharmacy today asking if it’s ok to vaccinate my 13 and 17 year old who walked over there after school
 I’m so proud of them for making this proactive healthy decision without forcing them

Had an interview was told I was "over qualified"
I had an interview a few hours ago and the first thing they tell me is that I seem over qualified for the job.
In most circumstances that's a compliment but when you're interviewing you don't want to hear that lolololol.
Also if I  seem over qualified why did you interview me





What's one of the strangest things an interviewer has told you

Does anyone love Jazz

Sometimes I really feel like the only 18 year old who still likes jazz
I still love a ton of other genres too, but jazz always stands out
 Anyone else relate

I am always listening to music, loudly, with my headphones in my ears when I'm outside to drown out the noise
I was almost hit by a car, and I'm so sorry to that driver

It was bright daylight, and it was in an alley, and I was in the street because I wanted to dodge this puddle of water and I jumped in the middle of the street and didn't even think to look behind and definitely didn't hear the car that had to suddenly react to this lunatic jumping in the middle of the street
I must have looked like such a loser to that driver
Honestly if s/he had gotten out of their car and punched me in the face, I'd deserve it
I'm so sorry
I must have scared them so badly
This is not the first time either, but I never learn my lesson
Is this considered jaywalking or just being an absolute moron

Candies are not expensive, why some people stole the whole bowl of candy

I was looking through r/trashy and I saw so many videos of people taking a whole freaking bowl of candy

Why people
 A huge jar of m&amp;m's is only ten bucks, costs less than your stupid costume
The worst is when I saw moms showing their kids how to take all the candies, what kind of education is that

I mean what are you going to do with all those candies
 Just sit on your couch and stuff yourself with sugar
 I am not a fan of candies so I don't even understand why people are taking all of them.
Have you ever been embarrassed about something you did as a child

I’m just sitting at my desk at work and I got embarrassed
I remembered being 12 or 13 and just figuring out Porn, and that it exists
Naturally I had no desire to look at grown ups, I wanted to see ppl that look like me, not understanding that, that is child pornography
I just had a flash back of me looking for that on the internet, processing why the results weren’t coming, and how much trouble I could’ve gotten my family into due to my curiosity
Lol I googled stuff like “girl and boy kissing naked” which I doubt gets flagged
But damn, how embarrassing to think about now as an adult.
My cat keeps missing the perfect view of a squirrel on my fire escape
This is so random but I live in a third floor apartment and I have a few pots outside on my fire escape that had summer veggies growing
Somehow, a squirrel has found its way up here to bury nuts in those pots for winter and I keep seeing it really close to my window
My cat is obsessed with birds and squirrels so I always run to grab him and whenever I get back, the squirrel is gone
I think my cat is getting confused because I keep planting him in front of this window but there’s nothing ever there when that happens
I’ll keep trying but it was this last time that I realized I’ve become a crazy pet parent.
Wanna chat music with a Metalhead

Music is a big passion of mine, and I love talking about it
As per the title, I'm a Metalhead, and I listen to the vast majority of metal subgenres
I know that metal is offputting for a lot of people, but if you can keep an open mind I'm sure I could find an artist you'd like.
Also share your music with me
 I'm happy to listen to stuff I'm not familiar with, I might discover something I like here.
Recently I discovered a fairly unknown progressive metal band that blew me away with how good they are
I dare you to listen to this: Wilderun - Far From Where Dreams Unfurl
Tell me what you think.
Hugs are nice
Man here, turning 23 today.This past few weeks I've felt a little starved for affection
I have the feeling that many of us men, especially those not involved in a relationship, often feel this way
Here is what I have to say : whatever sexual orientation you have, there is nothing wrong with hugging your other male friend
I've done it lately and guess what, it feels nice, and my friends did enjoy it too.
Women already understood that, I see them everyday giving that kind of support to each other
As men we should acknowledge that we also need it sometimes and that there is no shame to have for hugging your mate.Peace
Starting antidepressants is one of the best decisions I've ever made
I've been battling depression for ~11/12 years and I never thought I'd ever get better
My anxiety worsened 4-5 years ago and I've been trying to deal with it for both anxiety and depression for a good while now.
I feel like a load has been lifted off my shoulders and I can finally begin the process of healing and confronting traumas I've faced
I don't feel as cloudy anymore and can finally take things head on
I don't feel the same anxious pangs as often anymore
The med has its side effects, but I'm happy that I don't wake up wanting to die anymore.
Stuck in the hospital for the second time in 3 weeks
As the title suggests I'm in the hosptal
Again
 It really sucks and I'm bored out of my mind
I really have no one to talk to so I'd really appreciate it if someone hit me up
Hope I'll be getting out soon but it's still terrible
Thank you in advance
What YouTube channel would you want to be a guest/collab with

Pretty much what it says in the title
What YouTube Channel(s) would you love to be a guest on/collaborate with
 Or the same question but with Podcasts.
What is this, a Crossover Episode

getting the perfect present
hi, just curious, what are you guys thinking of getting your family members and coworkers for the holidays
 I feel like I never know what to get.
Going to the seaside
I am not in the best mood right now
Sorry reddit, that this is not the most lighthearted start
But I am trying to change that
With occasional walks around the park with one of my newest friends, deep long talks with old friends and tomorrow I want to try out silence for the first time
Since 3 months am I constantly trying to do stuff, I don't like being alone
Even when I am feeling overwhelmed by the attendance of people, even when my "social battery" is more empty than I ever, I can't stand being alone
I quickly feel lost and surreal
My life took a harsh turn in the past months, nothing is how it was before and it still reminds me of a past time
This is difficult to explain, but a few years ago I felt very alone and I couldn't even say what was on my mind even if there was so much of it
It doesn't much matter what happened in between that time and now
I think I have to reimagine myself, does that make sense
 (I am not a native speaker, as you may have realized already) Someone once said to my "be your better self"
I have to say, I already am my best self
I am wonderful, but sometimes I hide that fact behind my insecurity
I laugh a lot, but sometimes I do without being actually happy
Its like I am trying to convince myself through laughter of my happiness
Tomorrow I want to stop that kind of behavior
I don't want to smile, I want to look sad and weak
I want to smell the salt in the breeze
My ears should be hurting from the strong wind and my thoughts should go silent
Just for a second
Whenever I do something spontaneous, I do feel like a character in a book or movie
They go wherever they want or wherever destiny leads them
I don't know if there is something like destiny for myself, but I hope there is, then everything would make a little bit more sence.
I hope you have something that gives your life a sence and even if its just your existence, because you are important in every way
Everything will be good eventually, but it takes time
Until then I want to turn off the lights and be with myself, all day long.
I don't know if anyone can relate to these lines, if you do in any way or if you just have some other thoughts while reading this, please start a conversation as I would love to hear some voices before trying to pause the world for one day.
I have a genuine friend
Yes
I know that I've had other genuine friends, but this one shines out
For some context, I had a mental breakdown because there's just been a lot of stuff going on, and I have some weird undiagnosed mental issues
But alas, I basically went from 1st chair to 3rd because of some stupid test
For you non-musicians, the chairs get put in order from best to worst
1st being best, say 7th being worst
So anyway when I was walking from from my band period to my last period, and I start crying
This friend, who we'll call Ching, started I guess helping me deal with this emotional drop off
I'm better right now, and I just wanna say you're really cool Ching
Thank you.
P.s
I have thanked her, and she's said PMA, which means positive mental attitude
So right now, I'm thinking happy thoughts :)
I finally accepted myself as non binary and I couldn't be happier (FTNB)
I've already posted this on r/lgbt, but I'm posting it here too
For years I have been in denial, convincing myself I am a girl
You need to do girl things
And I've been in a terrible depression because of it.
I just had an epiphany.
I am not a girl
I am not a boy
I am a person
And that is okay.
I've already done everything I can to make myself feel better: get my hair cut from waist length, get gender neutral clothing, and rid myself of anything that has made me feel like a girl.
I am so much happier
I find joy in my life
I feel motivated so much
I can't describe in words how happy I am
I'm speechless, so sorry if this makes zero sense.
Had a cheap and amazing wedding

Got married yesterday, and my wife has always been against the big wedding thing
Going into debt for a single stressful day (and all the days leading up to it) were total nonsense to her.
She convinced me after we attended my sisters giant super fancy rainbow themed wedding, and I was staggered by the cost
 But we managed to have a wedding for 60+ people for about $1000

Veterans hall venue, minimal decorations, potluck dinner which was waaay better then any catered wedding food we've ever had, and a wedding gift of the bar tab being picked up by my parents
We had an amazing time and didnt have to break the bank

The hardest part of dealing with daylight savings time is convincing my dog she needs to eat an hour later than usual.
Just fending off my very punctual pupper for an hour and thought others might be in the same boat
Anyone got good tips to cheat her very accurate internal clock

What are friends really

I've heard it said that friends will act with your best intrest in mind (if that can be reasonably expected in that specific scenario)
So what if I have people who I like to hang out with and who (I think) like to hang out with me, but they dont consider acting in my best interest in times when it would be reasonable to expect them to do that
 Are they friends
 What are they

Threw out my back for the first time.
Holy shit does that hurt
Was on the floor for an hour, unable to move
Anyone have any good stretches/techniques for working it out again
 Lower right back, right above the ridge of my hip.
I actually feel proud of myself for once.
I always feel like I'm just waste time because I'm not trying to make something
I am now going to college for computer science and I haven't actually used my skills to make something (besides school work)
I have always wanted to make video games, so I make myself work for at least an hour a day on making this game, but I been slowly giving up on it since I feel like I'm not making any progress
This is probably because I am only working on it for an hour a day so I really haven't gotten very far.
I finally got to the point where I decided I wanted to make some basic models, so the game is more than just different sized blocks
I started to watch blender gurus fantastic tutorials on how to make a donut with the brand new update for blender (which is fantastic btw)
I got to the point of the first render, and I legit almost cried
Something about the blocks slowly revealing what I created just felt amazing, and I actually felt proud of what I made.
I really don't know why I made this post, I guess I just felt like opening up to strangers idk
Thanks for reading though
Oh here's the image if you are wondering
https://imgur.com/a/MDnio88
Share three random facts about yourself

Hello,
Let's keep this short, but interesting
Share three random facts about yourself and/or your life.
I'll begin.
I'm 33 year old man from India and these are three random facts about me:
I could look at a fish tank for hours
I think it's really relaxing and therapeutic.
I don't like footwear that's open
So, no flip flops/sandals for me
If I'm out of home, I only wear loafers/sneakers/shoes.
I got introduced to the concept of law of attraction, just a few months back, and I think it's pretty legit and really really powerful.
What are you guys cooking for dinner

I'm making a cheesy ham and potato soup, instant pot style
Enjoying a rum and coke, taking my time chopping up all of the ingredients
If you don't have an instant pot yet, you're missing something in your life.
PS
I can't wait to read responses over my onion tears
I feel like we live behind screens
Everywhere I go I see people glued onto their phones or t.v
I feel like so many people don’t realize that their living there lives behind a screen(me right now)
I know not everyone’s really living like that but I just wanted to talk about it
I’m just 19 and I feel like this is a thing you really think about when your older
P.S my grammar isn’t that nice.
Trying something new on Tinder
Am trying something new on Tinder, have had no luck with meeting people on there so ive given that up for the time being to try something new
Ive changed my bio to read something along the lines of, i dont want to pursue a relationship with you beyond here but I would like to hear about your life and problems
Ive found that I am very good at talking people through their problems and am looking to get a little bit of practice in doing so.
What do you guys think of this
 will i get any matches looking to vent
 Or will people find this too strange to give a shot

I'm trying to come up with a new word.
I just had one of those moments when you do something embarrassing but funny, and you can't stop laughing at it even though you don't want to laugh at it
And for some reason the fact that your laughter is involuntary is super annoying, and almost makes you kind of mad
 For brevity's same, let's refer to this as Emotion 1.
Everyone's experienced this, right
 Then why doesn't the English language have a word for this
 It took 45 words to explain that emotion, when it could/should take only one*.
So, what should we actually call Emotion 1
 Right now I just call it "You know that feeling when you embarrass yourself and you can't stop laughing even though you don't want to, and you get kind of mad at yourself for laughing
", which doesn't exactly roll off the tongue.
I'm not sure if this makes sense, but Emotion 1 is the little sister of that feeling you get when you're angry but something funny happens which makes you laugh, and then you get even more mad because you're in a serious situation and you're worried your laughter will makes you look like you're NOT mad, when you totally are
 Come to think of it, the English language should have a word for that too
 Until we come up with a cool name for it, let's call this Emotion 2.
So my (main) question is, what term should we use to describe Emotion 1
 What word should we use for Emotion 2

*or two, maybe three at most.
I can finally make eye contact with people
I was diagnosed with Asperger's when I was 11, and one of the challenges that I had with it was making eye contact
It's not necessarily that I was unconfident or timid, it's just that eye contact was (and still is) extremely uncomfortable for me and I usually listen better when I look down at their hand movements or something.
I've had a few teachers tell me to "look them in the eyes when they're talking" which is frustrating when I literally can't without feeling a terrible urge to look away which distracts me from what they're saying.
I've had this problem until a few months ago when I just started forcing myself to make eye contact
Just make eye contact, force myself to fight through discomfort, and if it gets bad after a few seconds I look away
I wasn't able to do it very well at first, but now I can make eye contact for about half the time and I feel it's enough so I don't look awkward or timid.
It's definitely a very strange problem to have, but I'm happy with myself for at least making progress
Hopefully I'll be able to practice this until I get completely comfortable with eye contact, but I don't know if that'll ever happen lmao.
Saving up for an iPhone 8 plus
Saving up for an iPhone 8 plus
Was planning on getting the 7 plus at first but hey, idk
Anyways, anyone with any tips
 Also, will black Friday give me a discount on the phone
 It costs $560 plus tax I think.
Cooking in a pot on a cast iron pan on an induction cooktop

Ok, ok, listen
Hear me out- I want your opinion on something.
I rent a basement space, so that means no real kitchen and definitely no oven or stove
I've got an instant pot, a microwave, not a lot of money to work with, aaaand an induction cooktop
It's sort of like a hotplate, but here's the thing: it only works with cast iron pans
Pain in the ass, right
 But my idea is this: just use the cast iron AS the cooktop
That way, I can still cook stuff in a pot and still adjust the temperature to my liking, albeit not 100% directly.
Good idea
 Bad idea
 What do you think

I have a handful of patches from places that I’ve been
Where should I put them

Basically whenever I go to a new country or area of a country I try to pick up a city/region flag in the form of a sew-on patch
I’ve amassed quite a few of these - probably around 10 - and I’m wondering what to do with them.
I was recently gifted a black denim jacket that I like a lot, and was thinking of sewing them onto there, but I’d kind of feel like that was..
showing off
 But I’ve only started this tradition recently, and all my flag trips have been more or less off my own back with my own money
But I could also put on other patches I like that aren’t from travel so it’s less..
intense.
I could put them onto my big rucksack, but I don’t use it that much
So that feels like a waste
But they’re just being wasted at the moment by not being anywhere

Any thought or suggestions

That smile
Do you ever experience that almost unconscious smile that draws on your face whenever someone you care about does anything , as mere as it is,  or just something that makes you immensely happy occurs for a small segment of time in a day , and you just can’t help but smile, and that smile that is purely and entirely natural, not even intending to happen, casually appears in your face, and you just feel like jumping around , almost like you’re in a different universe ,haha....
The last time that happened to me was around 2-3 months ago, on the first day of this school year
I was very sad, but somewhat happy , yet  extremely stressed
I was walking along with my new classmates , accompanied by our new class teacher , in a hall that seemed almost empty to me.
Until I saw him ; it was this teacher that had an immense impact on my life last year, which is my biggest inspiration , I admire him a ton and thanks to him I wish to be a teacher too ,haha.
I have this rather strange habit of putting my head down and my upper body slightly , sort of like a bow , done out of shyness to greet or apologize to someone out of high respect ;
So I did that without realizing
Oh no
He’s going to judge me , and probably think I’m extremely weird.
What did he do 
 He very happily smiled (extremely rare thing for him to do) and bowed even deeper to me , with his hands behind his back.
He even stopped for a moment from the conversation he was having with someone else just to interact with me , out of hundreds and hundreds of students he’s had walking by.
I don’t know, I don’t know why that was, but it really touched me for some reason, and I just started unconsciously smiling for around 15 minutes or so , to the point where my friends started teasing me for it ahaha.
Not sure why that was the case, but it made me really happy
I wonder if others get these kinds of moments too .
:’D
It’s my mom’s birthday today but ...
But three days ago, she threw my stuffed animals to the trash without even asking
I am 20 and I had them since before I was 5 and I still slept with them
It feels like she threw half of me to the trash and I still feel really bad about it ...
I don’t even want to talk to her but it’s her birthday today, what should I do 
 :/
People unaware of the beautiful things about themselves
My colleague has begun writing an inspirational quote on the whiteboard at the office daily
I imagine it takes her some time to find them, before she decides it's good enough to write down for everybody to see
I also see that she has a beautiful handwriting that, I think, few people can nowadays boast
Today, passing by, I told her that her handwriting is beautiful
I saw from her reaction that she was surprised to hear that
Which, interestingly enough, surprised me
I expected to see her nod acceptingly, but she was genuinely unprepared for that sort of feedback

I realized that she's probably so concerned about what she writes that she didn't expect anyone to appreciate how she displays the result of her effort
It relates for me to living graceously even if you have not reached your bigger goals yet - how you try to get to them may be just as beautiful a sight as you actually attaining those goals.
Plus it reminded me that there are lots of things that are beautiful about each of us, that we take for granted or underappreciate
So take a look at your complex personality and celebrate all the quirky, fun, unique stuff about yourself; and say it out loud if you see it in others, so that they take notice, too

Trying to finish informational speech but my heart is fluttery
My boyfriend told me last night over and over again that he wants to marry me
Which is honestly spectacular because I want to marry him
His family loves me and my family loves him, we love each other so much, I don’t think there’s anything I could do to within means that would really make him feel any different about me
We’re going to wait til we have some more money in our pockets but we’re working really hard to move in together and start our life
I’m still pursuing my career and I’ve definitely felt pressure from my fellow ladies to not let love be a really important goal above my career goals (which is fair because they’re right) HOWEVER, I love love
Ever since I was little I have just wanted to find that good comfortable cozy feeling with a person who feels the same towards me and I found it
A lot earlier than I expected to


 Woo boy
Idk
I’m so lucky and I needed to gush
Thanks for listening
Iam an idiot
Iam new to Reddit and cant post anywhere and when i finally posted something, there was a word limit where as i saw others with higher words
Later realised i kept typing on the title and not the post 😂
Also does anyone know how to check karma limit for different subredit

Am i the only one sick of these boomer/zoomer/millenial/etc denominations

Who comes up with this shit

 It's everywhere I look
I can't watch YouTube for 5 minutes, without hearing someone say doomer, or bloomer or some other pejorative term
The same for any social media site
Maybe I'm getting too old for internet.
Being healthy feels soooo good

I’m a young adult living in a first-world country and I’ve always been reasonably healthy but I always seemed to take good health for granted
I would party often, eat junk food, stay up weird hours and do other things that I knew weren’t good for me, but I didn’t really notice the negative effects.
Then last year, after suffering a bad concussion I was forced to reconsider my habits to aid my recovery
It took a long time to do, but eventually I went from someone who just appeared healthy to someone who truly was healthy and BOY OH BOY did it feeeeeel gooood

I feel like people are more focused on how being healthy makes them look, but to me it’s really how it makes me feel (not to mention not dying prematurely)
People so often feel like they HAVE TO be healthy for appearance that they overlook that they GET TO be healthy for themselves
 (This is representative of our modern mindset of extrinsic over intrinsic motivation, but that’s another conversation)
A few of the main things that got me there:
a regular sleep cycle
a healthy diet with plenty of fruit and veg
regular exercise (both weights and cardio)
a break from alcohol
drinking lots of water (waddup homies)
semi-regular meditation
First off: Sleep
When I was younger, I used to think sleep was something I have to do
It meant the Nintendo had to go off, it meant I couldn’t watch another episode or it meant i wouldn’t be able to catch Santa in the living room.
But over time, I began to see sleep as something I got to do
Every night when you close your eyes, you are teleported to a fantasy world while your brain and body repairs itself from the past and prepares itself for the future.
Sleep is actually such a beautiful phenomena
 Animals have evolved for billions of years on this planet, and EVERY ONE SLEEPS
Natural selection will turn a single-cell into a chameleon through nothing but trial and error, but it won’t remove sleep.
What’s your favorite first line

I feel like I’m going to go nuts thinking about how good the first line of Stephen Crane’s “The Open Boat” is: “None of them knew the color of the sky.” IMO it sets the tone perfectly while still leaving the reader hanging/wanting more.
What’s your favorite opening line
 It could be a movie, a book, a song..
anything that completely grabbed you when you first heard it.
My mental health has been improving
So recently my mental health state has been in the dumps I've felt hopeless but recently I've done more to improve my life
I've talked to more people about my problems some very kind redditors have given me words of encouragement I thank reddit for helping me improve little by little
Where did the fun on the internet go

Anyone remember when the internet and reddit were just fun sites with random crazy shit and people
 It's become so politicizes and sterilized the past few years, and it is in a way boring...
I guess you can't take back time but I find myself really yearning for the internet to be fun again, and not all business and seriousness
I just want it to be a virtual hang out space with strangers, but that doesn't seem to be the case anymore...
I keep searching for something like that, but it doesn't exist anymore
All the reddit alternatives are full of nohting but nutjobs or they are little protectionist fiefdoms or they are dead.
I guess it's just part of the fact most internet traffic is a monopolized by a few big firms
 The internet isn't free and open anymore like it was 10+ years ago
god it sucks.
i like this sub because it still has some of that 'you never know what you're gonna get' randomness
too many subs have become just the same old stuff on repeat.
I’m 45 years old and just had my MMR

For some unknown reason, I was not vaccinated in the 80’s for Rubella (as was standard in all UK schools when a girl was in their last year of primary school)
The second is due in four weeks time
My point is, you’re never too old to be vaccinated...even at my age, we’re still at risk of being infected (or being infectious to others)
Happy Tuesday Reddit

Its my birthday and I just found out I'm pregnant with baby number 2


I have no one to tell right now but IM PREGNANT

 and i found out today on my birthday
 Best gift ever ❤ I told my husband at the beginning of october that i thought we could be pregnant, before I even missed my period haha
We took the test this morning and what do you know

 😊 We are both so thrilled
 We told our son but he's too young to understand or spill the beans haha
 How am I going to handle two

 My hands and heart will be soo full.
Happy day
 Glad I could share this news with you all
We are thinking of doing a christmas reveal
 Hmm how could we do it
 So so excited
 Hope you all have a fantastic day friends.
Does anyone else gets too attached to people

Personally I feel like when i meet new (mostly) girls and go out few times with them i get waaay too attached to them
Sometimes to the point that I'm sad if I don't hear from them even for a single day or even few hours.
I feel it's weird because a lot of times they don't feel the same way about me
I'm trying to understand why that happens, but no luck yet
Does it happen to anyone else

How do you inspire yourself

I really want to get good at drawing and I know I have to draw everyday, but I don't always have inspiration to draw
How do you keep yourself inspired
 Could also apply to things like exercise.
I'm proud of not apologizing.
I feel extremely responsible for anything remotely connected to me
 It's almost like I tend think the world revolves around me
(It doesn't, I know)
The most problametic thing about this is me feeling apologetic for just about anything
Someone is not talking to me
 Maybe I did something bad
A friend crying
 Maybe I said something.
A friend of mine is sick
I cannot physically help him
I gave other friends who have been taking care of my friend some suggestions
Due to lack of proper communication, they felt like I was implying that they were not taking care of him property
I wasn't
I was trying to contribute (and it was a sound advice
One they did take.) and it's hard not to be able to do something useful
(Thanks to the part of me that keeps on thinking that most of whatever goes bad is my fault, this is even more difficult than it should be)
I did not say sorry to 'fix' it
I did not apologise for something I am sure was done in good faith
I explained what I meant very clearly
But I did not say sorry.
I moved 3 months ago and I'm not sure how I feel.
(20M) Right before summer ended I moved with my family from Michigan to Virginia, which is about 700 miles
20 years of making friends and finding myself is now no longer relevant
I've been going to classes at the local community college and I have some people I talk to every time we have that class and we laugh and it feels like I have friends again but when I go home I'm too afraid to text them or make any steps towards being closer
There's one person specifically I'm too afraid to ask for her socials at all
I just wish I would allow myself to be more social, since that's what I thrived on back home.
First freelancing job
HEY GUYS,Super excited
Just got my first freelancing job to subtitle some videos for an indian firm
ill only get payed 5 dollars an hour but still im still psyched about it and i just cant wait
I have no idea what software to use and i dont even know how to put a CV together but im just super psyched and proud of myself.
Thanks for listening &lt;3
Acceptance..
But how

As you go by living your life, misery is one unavoidable part to all in equal proportion
You might lose out on money, your family, a loved one, can be a heartbreak, a disease, betrayal or anything likewise.
I have been thinking, if the misery is more due to us not being able to accept what comes our way..
How did you learn to make peace with what has happened
 Ensuring bad memories you dont carry to your death bed.
I sometimes lose it out to fear on if I will be able to die peacefully
Any practices to make you accept what has happened...and forgive (or let go) them to move on in life
What kind of strength does it need and where do we build for it

I am not talking about distractions here, but facing our issues head on.
A stranger said I was pretty
I was walking up the stairs at my university while a guy I’ve never met was walking down the stairs
As we passed each other, he muttered under his breath, “You’re pretty”
I did a bit of the double take and said, “Sorry
” He replied with, “Nothing” and kept walking, totally deadpan
It was such a quick encounter but it really made my day :)
I want to learn things, but get discouraged when I don’t get much progress
In order to combat my depression I’ve been trying out new and old hobbies
Art, baking, singing..
the problem is, I’m terrible at all of these things
 And I know the old saying holds true, but I can’t help feeling discouraged when no matter how hard I practice I just don’t seem to be getting where I want to be
I’m very poor at self-discipline and this usually leads to my petering off my hobbies before they really get started.
I think the root of it is that I’m simply bad at managing myself
I can’t do it, I’m far too hedonistic and I just want to be relaxed and happy..
when that’s not how you live life and develop your skills
So please tell me, what do you guys do to make sure you’re on track

Found the perfect Christmas gift for me

Years ago I realised that I got really uncomfortable and anxious during Christmas season, as everyone expects to get and give the perfect christmas gifts
So I started one year with not giving gifts at all and really hardly accepted any gifts
This was extremely difficult to everyone in my family, especially on my fathers side of the family.
Over the past years I made it a habit to get a gift for one person, but only if I’d found something that’ll have a meaning for the other person; i.e a beautiful shot of my sister and her first born I made.
Most people around me accept my wish to not get anything, but my dad struggles extremely with it
On his family side it’s more about money than feelings
So I thought really hard about what to wish as he wouldn’t accept a “just the family and some quality time” and I had the perfect idea.
This year I wish, that any money someone wants to spend for me to christmas, they donate it to some charity of my preferences (mostly child hospices and sort of) and I think it’s just perfect
They get to spend money, I don’t have to worry about gifts and some kids will be helped with it

My boss once wrote a letter to excuse me from jury duty saying that I'm a very valuable asset to the company...
...and that missing two weeks of work would be detrimental not only to me but to him
I didn't realize how true that is until today when I looked through the history of the software code we've been working on and like 90% of the recent "pull requests" (basically features added or bugs fixed) are mine
 I mean, it's a small company with only 3 people but I always got the feeling I was underperforming - maybe I was mistaken
 It's heartwarming to know my work is appreciated - plus it gives me a feeling of job security...
Overheard in the waiting room
Just overheard someone say: Great Big Dogs Frighten Albert instead of the normal good boys do fine always.
Has anyone else heard any other pnuemonics
 Maybe ones for the other clef

Finally got my first "job"




It's nothing super exciting, but it's the first time I'll be paid

 My mother's birthday is coming and I've always wanted to offer her something from my OWN money
I don't know if it's a good deal since I'm paid a 100 euros to distribute 5000 flyers directly in mailboxes
I really don't know if it's really manageable as I will only have a few hours to do that a week since I'm still at school and with my bike only, for those who already did this kind of thing do you have any idea about the time it'll take
 Anyway I hope I can get her the fitbit watch she wants but can't ask to anyone
My dad don't live with us and she does so much efforts working as a foreign language teacher that she's under a lot of stress, might be really dangerous for her health
SOOOO I really really hope everything will turn alright
I'm meeting the guy who'll give me the flyers this week or so we'll give each other ID confirmation and he'll give me 50 euros when meeting in advance and that's freaking me out so much I don't know why..
I'll have to take photos of every street I'll pass by..
Can I get some encouragements please, I'm sorry I'm just so stressed and excited and needed to talk to someone about it





Is it less normal to be good at remembering names than bad

I just had this discussion where they don't remember their classmates names because if they  aren't going to talk to them they have no reason to remember them
For me however I just naturally remember names easily from when the teacher calls attendence or calls on people
My friends thought I was pretty weird but I'm curious to know your guys experiences with names.
How did your freshman years of college go

Mine is going awfully
I’m a physics major and my grades are trash and I’m just coming off a year of cancer treatment, so the transition sucks
I just had an awful weekend and got a police citation for alcohol (stupid, i know) and i just can’t seem to find my footing
what were all your freshman years like

I'm so excited
So I don't get too excited about much, but this is one of those few things
I play guitar and love it, in a world of stress filled uni days it's one of the only things that makes me truly happy
And now, at almost 1am, I've finally finished writing my first song
I'm really into metal and I've wanted to write a song for ages, but never been good enough to make something fun and complex to play, that also sounds good and has some form of structure and coherence
After finally making the last few riffs I am really pleased with it
Usually with stuff I write it doesn't feel correct so I don't complete it, but with this one, I'm genuinely pleased with every bit of it
There is still a touch more to do on it, making sure all the transitions are clean, making sure I can play it all the way through properly, but I'm excited for this
Tomorrow I have a day off from uni where I'm just going to be playing it the entire time.
Butterflies in my stomach and music in my head.
So I work with a girl who whenever she's around me, I just go weak in the knees, she smells amazing looks amazing, when she walks over to me I hear music in my head and get butterflies in my stomach, 8 just can't help myself but think about her on the daily, I was with a random from tinder the other day and I just 5hought of this work girl the whole time, I k ow what this means but I'm afraid to tell her how I feel.
A Strange Flash in the Night Sky
Let me preface this by saying that I have never done any hard drugs, nor experienced hallucinations of any sort.
Living in Florida, it’s common for me to take random trips to the beach at random hours for no particular reason
At 3 in the morning on July 29th, 2018, I was at the beach with three other friends
We were standing at a pavilion having casual in-depth conversation when suddenly a flash appears in the sky
My attention didn’t immediately go to it, because in the direction I was facing, I had only seen the sky light up for a mere second and assumed it was simply heat lightning
That wasn’t the case, because my friend Will caught it quick enough to see what it was and exclaimed for each of us to look where he was pointing
There I saw the most beautiful thing I had ever seen in my life
There was a slightly diagonal line of light, and surrounding it was nearly every color imaginable
Time seemed to stop in that moment, because although the colors weren’t there for long, I could still make out everything that I had seen
The white light lingered much longer than the colors; in the time that I had seen the flash, the colors only lasted what I would assume is one second and the white line for possibly 5
I knew that I wasn’t seeing things; I was straight edge at the time, I’ve never had a drink or even gave smoking marijuana the light of day
All three of my friends had seen it, and we could hear people at the shoreline of the beach exclaim “Oh sh*t
” Furthering my “proof” of this light occurring: prior to my friends and I relocating to the pavilion, we had spent about an hour and a half getting to know some teenagers on the other side of the beach
There were maybe 7 or 8 of them in the group, and I gained the snapchat of 5 of them
They all left to take each other home after our bonding, so that’s when we went to the pavilion
About 2 minutes after the light had disappeared, I received notifications from the 5 people I met who all claimed to have seen the same thing
To say the least, me, my friends, and our new acquaintances were in utter disbelief
The only thing we could talk about that night was the light, and I was so restless that afterwards I couldn’t sleep
I wanted the world, or at least the section of Florida I live in, to see what we saw so I decided to call the news team
They have cameras around the piers and bridges of the beach in order to use as background for weather and news reports on the television station they use
Surely enough, the woman I was talking to didn’t give me the light of day
She asked if I had been on any substances, to which I told her no
I was irritated and pleaded with her to just check the footage, to which she said “I’ll take a look.” To this day, judging by her tone, I don’t believe she ever looked at the footage
If anybody has any theories of what I might have seen, I would very much appreciate any input I can get
If anyone has experienced something similar, I would love to read your stories.
Describing the light I saw: There was a large beam of white light, and accompanying it was a spherical burst of color around the middle of the light
The colors were mostly primary colors, and some purple and green.
I got whistled at
I had ordered some food and it was about to be delivered, since it's nice out I went out to enjoy the fresh air while I waited for my food
A man was also outside who is one of my downstairs neighbors (I live in an apartment building)
I never said a word to him, I barely acknowledged him
I was just out to get my food
He had very nice blue eyes though that I noticed.
Anyway, I'm standing out waiting and I hear this cat call whistle come from him, he whistled at me
So that was interesting.
So, how are your evenings going

hey guys i eat doritos with sugar
sometimes i dip them in sugar
i have the sweetest sweet tooth ever
i mean not EVERY time i eat doritos...maybe indulge myself once or twice every few months
i’m just a generally weird eater
the amount of sriracha i put on everything is ungodly...i go through a full bottle a month by myself.
thoughts
 do u have any weird food combos

Who Makes The Best Pizza
 FOOD WARS
In this tournament, we take a look at Pizza, that doughy crispy, cheesy saucy concoction made from the Gods, served up right in a circle or square and cut to be eaten by nearly anything that moves.
Some states/towns/cities/counties claim they make Pizza the best, and as a New Yorker, I definitely gotta say it's something in the water....but I'll let you be the judge
Vote for the best, and put your Pizza to the test, who will come out on top

Best slice will be tallied and put to the top..
NOW GET RANKING

I just need to know if ketchup on a burrito is weird
My roommates and I are having a debacle about whether or not that is gross
I saw my roommate put ketchup on a burrito and I was throughly disgusted, they said that was fine
What's the consensus

I realise more and more how stuck I am between my parent's Hispanic culture and the American culture of lived my entire life in.
Currently 17, my father from Honduras and my mother from Mexico
I remember for as long as I've been around kids of different races (aka most of my life) that I've been called "Mexican" or "Latino" or "Hispanic"
Nothing wrong with that of course, because in reality that is what I am
My mother always taught me to be proud of such a fact, that I'm no American but a proud hispanic.
Yet it's not often that I think of myself as Hispanic
When I sit down and do self-reflection, I legitimately sometimes surprise myself when I realize "Hey...I'm not white/American, I'm full blooded Hispanic
" I always feel quite embarrassed when I make that realization, sometimes it feels like an insult to my parents, to my family, that I sometimes feel like a white American.
That I speak with an American accent and mostly consume english media and American food, that I barely, if even, believe in your typical Catholic beliefs, that my political beliefs are more radical than those of my parents or even most of my family
Hell, if I never told you I was full latino, you probably would've imagined some white middle class American writing this, and not some hispanic kid who grew up in the ghetto with his immigrant parents for most of his life before my family's intelligent financial decisions brought us up in the world.
Then again I can never feel like a true American either, most obvious blockade to that being the color of my skin or my fluency in Spanish or my bias to fellow Hispanics (despite the fact that most full hispanics would consider me a white washed chicano and likely wouldn't have a bias to me)
I guess I'd just like to know if there are others like me, not just hispanics but the children of immigrants from very different countries who arrived to the US, and grew up very differently from their parents.
Anyone else have this fear

for years now I've always had the fear of someone looking in at me through the window or breaking into my house
I've been scared of this for way too long and want ways to stop this fear
i have blinds and always lock my door though.
I just told the new guy at work to ask the manager where we keep the dungeon next time they see each other
Lmfao, Hes gonna look psychotic asking the manager of a produce section in a grocery store where he keeps a dungeon
Idk why I thought this was so funny but I can't stop laughing
A year ago, someone from this sub told me to seek help
I did, and I am forever thankful

I was feeling blah and I always go to reddit to get to know people, or check on what's new
I saw r/CasualConversation at the time and thought "hey, this is interesting to my dying soul".
I spent a few days and I liked it here
One day someone opened a thread about talking on anything, so I joined in.
The OP told me a-matter-of-factly that he is concerned that I have such bleak thoughts, and told me to seek help
That's it
He's not trolling, he was being sincere, and it got me thinking "why not
 what worse could happen
" and I thought my depression is like a temporary thing.
I was glad I seek help, even in reddit
I found out that it's a lifelong thingy and partly genetics, and I slowly got my mind and spirit back.
Life got hard sometimes, of course, but I take everyday one step at a time.
A (either elementary or middle schooler) boy just asked me to high five on the street
I was walking back from officework and I saw this group of, honestly idk, I suck at guessing age, so either elementary or middle school boys jumping to reach a shop sign, I guess they were competing to see which one can jump the highest
 Anyway as we crossed path one boy extended his hand to me and said “high five for freedom
” And I was so confused so I just went with it and high faved him
Should I reacted differently

I graduate next year from college and I don’t even know what I want to do
I’m trying to sleep and can’t help but think about my future
I graduate fall 2020 with my bachelors in child development
I’m terrified I chose the wrong major and picked a field that doesn’t seem to get paid enough
I see a lot of my friends and colleagues and they just seem so successful
I turn 26 this month and can’t help but think I’m super behind in my academic success and establishing a career
Even when I graduate I’ll be 27 and I don’t even know what the hell I want to do with my degree
I work at a preschool now as a Teachers Aide and a I can definitely rule out early childhood education
I do not want to work with that age group for the rest of my life
Now I’m not sure if I should continue school and get my teaching credential or get my masters and maybe do something like social work
 I really don’t know
This beats me up every single day and I can’t help but think I’m just wasting my time going to school.
Anyone else kind of terrified of meeting people on the internet

When i was a kid my parents drilled into my head that i needed to be careful on the internet - which is absolutely a good thing

 - and i’ve always felt super weird talking to/meeting people on the internet
It doesn’t help that im rly shy in real life
It sucks because i bet there are loads of people i’d get along well with that i could have met but im absolutely terrified of people on the internet

 Anyone else feel like that

What songs always put you in a good mood

I made a playlist a few weeks back filled with songs that make me smile and lifts my mood
Been listening to it a lot recently whenever I’ve been feeling too stressed and need to take it easy
 So I wanted to know what songs you guys listen to when you need a pick-me-up or lifts your mood whenever you play it

overwhelmed with schoolwork
I'm sitting down right now to do some of my schoolwork and I'm feeling really overwhelmed
The work is not that hard, or that much, but it is really focused on myself, and my past experiences
I'm feeling really insecure about my assignment, and I've put it off for that reason
I'm trying to get in the mindset of 'fuck it, the professor doesn't even know me that well and can't judge me on the things i say in this assignment.' But it's just really hard.
IDK if this counts as life stories, but i didn't know wich one to put on this post.
I feel a tad less crazy...
When I see other runners out just after 5 a.m.
Anyone else have a thing similar where seeing others doing it too you just don't feel quite so crazy

And Happy midweek- hope it's been a good one thus far
And If it has not, well hopefully the 2nd half will get better for you.
My life has done a positive 180
A year ago I felt unwanted, scared and alone
Today I unsubscribed from r/2meirl4meirl because I no longer feel that way.
I've pretty much cut all ties with the religious sect I grew up in, I enjoy my work, I have made good friends, I have other hobbies than just slouching infront of my PC, I take care of my health, I kissed a girl and bought a nice apartment.
These are all things that I thought I would never be able to do and upon seeing what I've become, what I'm becoming, I feel happy and look forward to the next day for the first time in forever.
To all those who wonder how
I had to work towards a goal
What your goal is, only you know but you need to have one
You can't get anywhere without going towards something.
Yup
A true r/wowthanksimcured.
I never claimed to be all knowing and all wise
I'm a fucking kid who broke free from a cage
Nothing more
I can't tell you that what I did will work, that won't help anybody
My situation was and is unique and so is yours so only YOU know what it is YOU need to do.
What's that one food you hate but everyone seems to like it

I personally hate bacon
I dunno why
 It just doesn't taste right and didn't match up to how I imagined it to taste like how many people say it.
What about you

Let's talk about my mopey evening
I've been on a high note all week because I asked my dream girl if I could take her out and she said she'd love to go.
(previously we've talked on and off for a long time and recently both ended up staying single for a few months, so I asked a week ago)
She gradually got a little distant until today I asked if anything had changed and she said she's having trouble with the idea of moving on to a new relationship
I understand, I also didn't want to date for months after my ex, so I just wished her luck and offered her some encouragement, but it's left me in a super lonely mood.
Since I don't want to bring my friends down with something they can do nothing about, I'm here - What would you do to distract yourself

Honestly can say mental health does not get enough treatment or attention from the so-called authoritys that pretend to care
For years Ive probably been depressed , lost , suicidal but have never reached out because I've always thought no one can help , only in the last 6 month have I put myself out there fully and asked for the help from anywere I can get it to no avail
I've had a cpn who comes out every few weeks for 20 minutes has never listened to how I actually feel , since he has been comming I have tryed to kill myself 3 times but failed , probably trying to get the attention that I need and want help but still nothing
I have now kind of controlled my oan thoughts and feelings without there help
I honestly think no matter how little your thoughts and feelings may be it can only take a second for it to turn into something major , I know it's going to take me to end my life before these fake authoritys listen
Anyone feel the same
I'm getting tired of being in rock bottom
I left my job last year and I've been job searching for a little over a year now
At first, it was great having all that freedom
 I've been staying positive the whole time; I go to the gym 6x a week, I spend time reading, doing yoga, cooking, pursuing an entrepreneurial goal, and applying to an average of 100+ jobs a week
However, my savings have slowly been dwindling and I don't even know if I can make it to next month anymore.
I don't know if I can do this anymore
It's just too slow - I'm stagnating now and I can't seem to get out of this hole.
office drama
so i just recently started this job with a correctional facility in charge of payroll.
the lady that does accts payable and receivable has been doing both jobs since they lost their last payroll person
when i came in i appreciated the help and all but 2 months into this job, she still is hovering over me micro managing me, when she is not a manager herself, we have a finance manager.
so yesterday i brought it up to our manager that i feel that she needs to let go of the reigns so to speak and we needed  a team meeting
that did not end up well at all.
the ap lady gets all bent out of shape and starts acting petty af.
she is in her 50s .
says fine im not touching payroll.
even if she is out for a couple of days im going to tell everyone they have to wait till payroll comes back....she now is giving me the cold shoulder, no good mornings no see you tmrw, has gone as far as putting any work for me in my inbox instead of giving it to me
im right out of her door in my office.
it is so funny that i tried to be an adult  and talk about it in a nice way in a team meeting and she is acting like a dam child.
its so frustrating...
and now all her coworker friends are vibing weird with me now as well.
wth are we back in high school.
funny thing is .
when she was talking to me ..
she talked shit about everyone here in the office.
lmfao.
but im keeping my mouth shut and just watching all the drama i didnt need or want passing by my office door  ..lol  but on a good note.
she isnt micro managing me lol Bye, Felicia
My self-esteem has skyrocketed after being off of Facebook and Instagram.
In June I decided to deactivate my Facebook and Instagram accounts
I really just did it for my own mental health – I wanted to get away from certain mental triggers that were on there
Seeing tragedies were just too much for me, and I really wanted to focus on my every day life – not carry with me the really sad news that was on there
That was my main motivation.
But to be honest, I never really logged on Facebook and Instagram and felt happy
It wasn’t Reddit
On Reddit you could customize what pages you follow
Being on Reddit is really such a wonderful and entertaining experience
I actually look forward to coming on here
But, I digress…
Aside from certain mental triggers, I looked forward to focusing on my life and actual meaningful connections with the people in my life
I thought it was silly that I know so much information about people I don’t ever spend time with
It seemed superficial.
I know so much about these peoples lives, but it would be awkward if I asked them to lunch
 I didn’t want to fill my life with that kind of superficial communication anymore
Especially since it was a kind of communication that wasn’t fulfilling.
What I didn’t think would happen is how my self-esteem skyrocketed
I decided to document more of my real life
Record lots of home movies, diary entries, more photos of things that I wanted to take photos of – not just stuff that I thought would look good on social media.
I didn’t realize that in doing so, overtime, I would love photos that five months ago I thought were hideous
I like myself so much more now
Before I would see 1 million things to pick apart from one photo, but now I look at that photo and totally love it
It’s really awesome.
Presentations are my kryptonite
I’m a junior in college and still get crazy nervous with presentations
Even if I memorize all the material perfectly, when I get up there to speak, it’s like that information goes on a 3 week vacation
I’ve been repeating shit about Giulio Romano to myself like a crazy person, but oh well
 Do you guys have any stress when it comes to presentations
 How do you deal with it

I got my first offer for a Master’s school in London and I’m so excited

I had so much anxiety the past few weeks thinking that every school would turn me down but at least one didn’t

I’m super happy right now
I’ve told all the people around me that are suppose to care, but nobody has replied so far but it’ll be okay.
I just wanted to share this with someone.
Already dissatisfied with my job, but can’t quit since I’m the breadwinner
It seems like every job is shiny and wonderful the first few months, but then you see how it’s really affecting you and your life
Then suddenly you’re aware it’s not a good fit
But I can’t quit because it pays really well
I spend 95% of my time in my office alone with no work to do and it’s taking a big toll on my already crappy mental health
On top of that, I have no time to take care of the house or organize or do anything that I feel is important.
My husband applied (and hopefully gets) a job that pays almost as well as mine, so maybe I can change jobs eventually.
Does anyone else have this problem, or any advice

Me and sports
Hi

When I was younger I was pretty sporty but nowadays I am friiickin unsporty
I really want to change that but there is one problem - I don't like any sports.
For example: I hate running (I tried it but I failed)
Don't know how to motivate myself because I can't find the right one which I really (from the bottom of my heart) love to do it.
Anyone has the same problem

What are some fun ideas for building an escape room
 (for my girlfriends birthday)
I want to put her in a room
She has to get out by solving weird puzzles
the answer to every puzzle, is an opening to a new puzzle.
If you have some awesome ideas, please share :)
have a nice day thanks

I live this weird life where I have inherited a lot of money
Almost no people know this, but I’m having people over on Friday, and I’m really worried about how they are doing to react.
I’ve tried to keep it a secret and only a few of them has been to my place
 Now everyone will know and there are going to be a lot of questions about it.
My stomach hurts and it has been keeping me up at night
The way some of them has talked about others with money in front of me makes me scared.
People has found out before, and suddenly they don’t relate to me
They don’t think that I can feel the same struggles and they start joking about my life being without struggles.
I’m going to hear the same stupid jokes that I’ve heard my whole life on repeat for the next few weeks.
The worst are the ones that wants to «make you realize how lucky I am” as if I don’t understand it
Lecture me on my own life.
I really want everyone to enjoy the party and the people there
Not talk or think about the materialistic aspect of it
It’s makes me sad that things are going to turn into what I have instead of the moment I want to share with them.
Sorry for spilling it all out here, and I’m probably a piece of shit for saying and thinking these things, but I needed to get it out
I really have no one to talk to about this
The whole situation makes me feel alone, and the reactions and jokes expands that feeling.
Thanks for listening
I am trying to become friends with my new neighbor
I moved into a new apartment about 4 months ago
My neighbor and I have had a few failed conversations, mostly due to political differences, but today we had an entire, civil, conversation
I have major anxiety so I'm sweaty and tired now, but I'm so happy I invited him over today.
I don't really want to become besties with the guy, but it's nice to be nice to your neighbors and he lives alone
I live with my SO now, but that's recent and I remember how living alone can be difficult.
I felt so dumb
I got off from the bus, realising that I've forgot my cap on the bus, I turned around just to have the bus door slammed right in front of my face.
Just as I was going to grief for the loss of my Adidas cap, it's still on my head 
Thanks for listening
Got some shitty news today...how's life treating you today

It has been a bit of a rough day
I got some news I wasn't expecting that threw me off and to be honest...saddens me
Tell me something good
Or bad
How's life treating you

I’m looking for some good choral pieces that my choir can sing, were at the high school level but pretty highly regarded in competition and adjudication
What are some songs I should take a look at

We are ranked superior by PMEA adjudication standards, as well as at festival Disney, but that scoring was nearly 4 years ago at this point
We have the largest men’s choir on the east coast, even bigger than colleges, (supposedly) and we have even been asked to sing at American Choir Directors Conventions in the past, so we need a challenging piece but not one so hard that a high schooler couldn’t get it.
My day was bad
Tell me something good about your day.
Just feeling lonely and pessimistic today
I would love to hear about something good that happened to you, or something you’re happy about
Lay it on me

Currently in Disney in Florida, can't wait to go home

I've enjoyed my time here but I'm home sick now and I'm flying home tomorrow to the UK
Been here 11 days and done all the parks and some of the rides
I can't do many due to medical conditions so I've spent a lot of time waiting for my family to come out of rides
Don’t think I'd come back again but its a nice place to visit
It's just an illusion though
It's not real.
My Youtube recommendations have gotten messed up
I don't even know what I did to bring this upon myself
I'm getting all these Fortnite, League of Legends, Spanish conversation, and Logan Paul videos
None of these are things I ever watch
I usually can just turn on the autoplay and jam out during my workouts, but now I can't do that
I used to find new music every day that way, but I'm just getting all this weird gossip and life hack stuff instead
:(
On a quest to find the most headbangable song
Send yours

Title says it all, I'm on the long journey of finding the most well written headbangable compilation of riffs
 There are no rules, just send a song my way and I'll give it a headbangablility rating based off how creative, well-written, and of course, headbangable it is.
Here are some likely contenders as of now.
Candlemass - Black Stone Wielder
Sodom - Tombstone
November's Doom - Black Light
Opeth - Serenity Painted Death
Gojira - Clone
Morbid Angel - Where the Slime Live
Vastum - Amniosis
Bloodbath - Anne
Sober
I usually smoke weed every day
But yesterday i decided that I'm taking a little break because my throat has been feeling like its being affected by my smoking so i decided to take a couple days off....
.....One day in and I'm feeling heavy af
Im usually a light hearted person who doesnt stress about pretty much anything but tonight all my heaviest thoughts are surfacing and i felt the need to take a smoke and chill (my problem solving is usually great when I'm mildly high and thinking things through) but i decided against doing that and analyse my thoughts sober instead......
......That hasn't been great
So i decided to vent on here and maybe just read a book or go to sleep
But I'm also thinking do i actually have any problems to speak of or am i just irritated cuz I'm not getting high rn.
Cafes
Sorry if this one might be a bit of a boring topic, but I have always been fascinated by cafes
I really wish to work at one or even eat at one
Just something about them gives off a calming environment to me
Just being able to relax, look outside and enjoy whatever beverage you just ordered
It sounds so relaxing
Do any of you share similar thoughts or any cafes near you that you enjoy

I finally learned how to drive stickshift


I decided to finally stop overthinking the process of driving a stickshift car, I went with my friend in his wrx and learned in about in half an hour
 He said It felt like I was a natural at it while shifting

I'm hosting Thanksgiving this year and I'm so excited

My sister is moving in in a couple days, so my mom and my other sister are coming as a housewarming/Thanksgiving trip
 This will also be my first thanksgiving with my boyfriend and I'm so excited I already chose all my recipes and made my grocery list
Instead of traditional Turkey, (who really likes Turkey
) I'm roasting a bunch of quail
The quail will even be cheaper than a Turkey.
Now I'm going to mash all the recipes together to put together a prep timeline.
What are you all doing for Thanksgiving

I went to the Jazz game
Up until this point, I have never been to a live basketball game
Ever
A few good friends of mine decided to change that
They had an extra ticket to the game that was originally meant for another friend, but he was unable to make it
So these friends decided to choose me next, and while I was reluctant as an introvert, I didn't regret going
It was so much fun to be there
It was uncomfortable at first, but I quickly grew fond of the game, and ended up pouring out my soul into the game just like everyone else
It felt so good to step out of my comfort zone and get into the game.
My Dad has come home from deployment
My father recently got deployed in the army and today he came home to us
I’m so happy right now that I needed to share it on the car ride home
I’ve missed him so much over the past 1.5 years he’s been gone
Honestly it’s just a great feeling to have my family home :D
I’m sick with a cold, UTI, kidney infection and possibly a kidney stone
I needed new antibiotics and asked my roommate to take me to get them.
So, as the title explains I asked my roommate if she could take me to get my antibiotic and she kindly said yes
I don’t have a car and she does and is usually very happy to help me
She told me that she would come get me after her last class that she was leaving to go to
Classes at our university are usually 50 minutes long
5 hours later she shows up at our dorm and starts talking about how this campus event was so good
And how hanging out with her friends was so great
I asked her why she didn’t come back and she just said “sorry” Not really even seeming to care that she ditched me in a time of need
I started to get very angry and told her “I needed those meds hours ago
And you didn’t even tell me that you couldn’t pick me up.” She asks if the pharmacy is still open and I tell her it closed two hours ago
At this point she stops talking to me at all and I leave the room to go out to the parking lot to think
I come back wanting to have a serious conversation with her about this but she totally ignores me
This whole semester we haven’t had a serious conversation once
We’re fine friends and all but I don’t know how to actually have a conversation with her and have her take it seriously
I’m trying not to be selfish and understand that she doesn’t get to go to these campus events a lot but at the same time she promised me that she would help me and left me without a word
I just don’t really know what to do or how to move forward at this moment
I’m so hurt and angry that I’m not talking to her at all and I don’t like being that kind of person
If there’s a problem I’d rather get it talked about and over with but I just can’t seem to do that with her
I’d rather be kind and understanding rather than mean and selfish
I just don’t know what to do.
(Sorry if there are any errors
I am currently on my phone typing this in the shower because that is my only place of privacy)
The biggest lesson in life, learned young.
About five or six months ago I had yet another argument with my family
I had been fed up, going in and out of the shelters since my parents had stolen $6000 of my money and nobody had done anything to pay me back
In a rage, I left, never to return to the hardwood floors I had been sleeping on through the winter months with little more than a bedsheet as a blanket and my sweater as a pillow.
I made a decision on a whim, took what money I had, and bought a bus ticket, arriving in a completely unknown city with nothing more than the clothes on my back and a $5 bill the day before my 20th birthday
I went straight to the homeless shelter, met a man over twice my age, and paired up with him as a new friend.
We worked on getting work in landscaping, and redid our resumes
We didn't get work, but staff overheard our plans to get out of the shelter, and connected us with the housing coordinator they had, who for the next month worked with us to get onto a government program and move into a new apartment.
We moved into a unit on the south side of the city with two others, and we celebrated
For the next few weeks, I would work on getting a job, and they worked with other things until their issues became more evident with alcohol and fiscal irresponsibility
Disappointed with the situation and the non-stop arguments they started having, I left..
starting at square one a second time.
At that time I thought I was hopeless, losing what little I had yet again
Everyone from high school had something to look forward to and here I was, still struggling with my basic needs
I didn't want to end up back at the general shelter, so after treating a sudden case of lice I went to the Salvation Army.
They put me in a private transitional bedroom within two weeks, and I worked with new agencies that helped me gain work certificates, ID, training, financial knowledge (especially regarding credit), and an improved resume
After getting in touch through an employment agency, I started a new job at Walmart two months after first arriving in the Salvation Army.
Fast forward to last week
I received an email, telling me my name came up in a certain meeting
I was being considered for a housing program, and was told to meet up with a housing coordinator, which I did yesterday
She told me the ins and outs and that they'd help me maintain my own private apartment and give me as much support I need until I'm 24
All goes well, I'm living under a stable roof for the first time in over a year by next month.
I tell this story because I've seen and been through a lot of crazy stuff in this time
This is the first time in years I feel like I have something to look forward to in life and that I matter
I haven't had suicidal or depressive thoughts in ages, and despite being in a shelter, I feel genuinely happy with my life
A lot is coming for me...but it wasn't easy by any means.
Twice, not once, but twice I've had to give up what I knew 
Twice I had to take steps backwards, and twice I felt hopeless, lost, and alone
However, each of those times, I came out better than the last and have now recently come to realize from my first-hand experience the most powerful advice I can give:
When it comes to change, give up everything or gain nothing.
Netflix Original series and movies are fire
Everything Ive seen that Netflix has produced has been so good
I was just watching that show "Explained" and it's informative and very entertaining
I really like how Netflix seems to not shy away from difficult topics or morbid things.
What has been your favorite Netflix OG

A 25 year old BMW made me the happiest I've been in years
Im Just throwing this out there, figured I'd share it with you fine Reddit folks
 Let me Just start with the fact that I'm a car guy
I love driving, wrenching, studying how things work and basically everything that has some form  of engine is exciting for me
I went out of a serious relationship a few months ago and everything felt so gray, things felt like I couldn't be happy anymore
Five months ago I decided it was about time to buy a New car, since my old one was pretty beat up and a change would be nice
I stumbled on the ad for the BMW and bought it the Day after I went on a test drive
I was very afraid of driving it the first week for some reason, but I Just now realise how happy it makes me
Every time I turn the key I have a smile on my face, I can't wait to go on scenic drives and conquer mountain passes
Its Just me, the road and good music now, and thats Okay
Nobody can dictate my happines anymore
I've learned the important lesson that YOU should be the reason for Your happines, and not someone else
 Thank you for reading this and sorry for the messed up English
Have a nice Day, Reddit

My Great Grandmother thinks The Office is a reality show and the characters are real people and she LOVES it


Translation Feature on social media is groundbreaking
I was just watching a video shared of a spacewalk on the ISS shared by a spanish language page and was able to read through the comments from people whose language I have no understanding of
It was really cool and there were a lot of insightful and thought provoking comments
Ranging from ones about the view itself and its awe inspring nature, to ones about the decline of science literacy and the spread of incorrect ideas about the nature of the earth itself
All in all I can't really think of the word to describe what feeling went through my head when I realized these individuals who most likely are unable to understand my language and vice versa, were able to communicate their thoughts clearly around the world and I have the ability to do the same
Im sorry if my grammar is bad, it's very late in my time zone and I just got home from work.
Hey fellas, need your opinion on college major: safe choice or passion

Currently majoring in biomedical engineering and I kinda hate it
The biomedical part is great but not a fan of the engineering, it’s all math and physics which I not only hate but also suck at
I’m much more interested in doing something like industrial design
Problem is, engineering pays like 40k more a year on average, and is probably easier to get a job in
Plus if I switched out of engineering now I’d feel like I’m “giving up” and being a quitter, part of the “__% of engineering students drop out” statistics because I’m too lazy to just buckle down and force my way through all the math and physics.
Is it worth doing something I dislike for better job prospects
 Does engineering get less math-and-physics-y when you actually get into the workforce

I feel like this is a pretty major life decision so obviously there’s no better place to ask for advice than from random strangers on the internet
Thanks all

Pretty cool bus ride today
So me and two other friends were on the bus home from high school, and we were sitting at the back of the bus, but not right at the back, and we were spread out across some seats, because of other people
(Trust me this is important to the story) Then the three people sitting at the very back got off the bus, so we promptly moved to that spot, and one of my friends spotted a phone left on the seat, left by one of the three
The bus had only just started to move, and so she knocked on the bus window to get the attention of the guy, and showed him his phone, in which he started running after the bus
At the same time, l was telling the bus driver to stop, which was really weird, and I said something to the affect of “‘scuse me, stop, um, this guy left his phone” (I didn’t handle the situation well)
The bus driver stopped the bus, I grabbed the phone from my friend, ran outside, and gave him his phone
He said “thanks mate” (not helping the Australian stereotype) and I got back on.
The end.
How to not burn out from studying

So my end of year exams are in a week or so and I have been studying everyday since the past three weeks
I have two tests and a presentation coming up (despite the exams), and suddenly I just feel so tired that I can’t be bothered to study anymore.
I have been procrastinating for the past few days, haven’t been studying for the exams or tests or practicing for the presentation at all
How do I stop myself from feeling tired of studying

I dont have any hobbies.
I never seem to find any hobby
I'm interested in one thing for a while but few days later it dies
And im no longer interested in it.
I started watching anime a year ago
I was super obsessed with it lol
Watched over 10 15 shows in just a couple months
Followed so many anime sub reddits
Made a watch list
Covered half of that list
Binged so much that i lost interest in it lol
And i havent watched one single anime in months now
I just dont feel the mood.
And that was just this one example.
I'm not much of a gamer
Like not at all
But i started watching live streams and all
So it peaked my interest
I played one game
Was super obsessed with it
Then lost interest and never played any other game after.
I can never find any hobby for myself and its really annoying lol
Am i alone

An Umbrella in a Rainstorm and a Change of Character
At the beginning of summer I [24M] decided on a whim to leave my job and move cross country to go back to school to do a career change, live closer to family, etc
After learning to be awake during the day time (I worked graveyard shift for about a year and a half as a corrections officer, the effect of the job is tangentially important for the story), I decided to see if I had a shot at getting some sort of job/internship at an accounting firm since I was gonna be going to school for it
Having lived in the desert my entire life, I never considered the possibility of getting stuck in a surprise rain storm, which is exactly what I drove into going downtown so I went to the store, bought one, continued on my way downtown
I've been walking around, visited a few firms, getting ready to start looking for a place unwanted to eat lunch, as I'm walking I pass a guy, approximately my age, and he didn't have an umbrella, didn't know it was going to rain so he didn't bring his umbrella to work as he told me, so he asked if he could walk with me to his office building
My work background has made me pretty suspicious of people, but I told myself when I moved, I'd make the effort to change and be a more optimistic (from extreme pessimist) person, so I agreed to walk with him, we started walking and ended up having a good time making small talk.
That interaction surprisingly made my day, having a very positive interaction with a stranger can have a profound impact on the mood of the day
Working in an extremely hostile and negative environment led me very antisocial outside of hanging out with the several coworkers I was actually friends with, so being able to get out of there, away from a place I grew up in and going somewhere new and making the effort to reshape myself is a very real breath of fresh air.
I love noticing the changing of the seasons
If you live in a part of the world that has four seasons then you might know what I mean
Right now it’s like an inter-season period where the weather’s starting to get really frigid and the trees are almost totally leaf-less, but it’s too early for snow and winter to show up
Whether or not you love or hate winter, I just enjoy noticing where the season is right now and taking in all the details of nature as it is right now.
Anyone else really wish they were born in another generation

This isn't one of those r/lewronggeneration situations, I'm not saying my generation is awful (gen Z)
I just really wish I was born a millennial sometimes because I wish I could've experienced many of the things they did, things like the advent and rapid development of the internet, early late 90s-2000s television and media, the 2000s emo scene, myspace, stuff like that
I think it would've been really cool to see these things and experience them
    The idea of living in a world without the internet also fascinates me deeply
I spend much of my time on the internet today, and it surrounds me pretty much everywhere I go so the idea of a society unconnected by internet is genuinely inconceivable
Do any of you guys wish you were born in another time, and if so when and why

Cockroaches are so disgusting
I was doing the laundry earlier
I was sorting them out and I accidentally dropped the sock pile I was holding onto my foot and a freaking cockroach landed on my foot as well
That feeling was so disgusting omg I’ve been scrubbing my foot for the past 10 minutes
Why are cockroaches a thing..
I’m okay with lizards and ants but if I’m in the same room as any insect that can fly, I’m out.
Holding back on things you enjoy doing has to be the most annoying and good feeling at the same time
So as the title may reveal, I have to study for an exam that I attend tomorrow
But most importantly I finally got to shoot some timelapses of my hometown today which were the last ones to make for a short film with my friends AND OH BOY I can't wait to just finish cutting it.
How do you manage situations like these
 or do you let it go and give yourself up on discipline to dive into the more fun activities

Gratefulness comes in waves
There are some days that just seem so hard
Multiple exams, friends that make you upset, cant find a job, people around you seemingly thriving so much more than you, having no motivation to even drag your ass out of bed...
But sometimes, it gets a little better
An old friend you havent spoken with shoots you a text
You realize how lucky you are to have the people around you, old and new
You realize just how beautiful around you the world can be, the snow, the trees, the tiny fluffs of clouds.
Before dwelling on more of the bad things around you, it's so grounding to just bask in gratefulness, even for a little bit, on all the little things in your life that /are/ going right.
Today is my last day at my job, I'm going to miss it.
Today is my last day at my temp job
I knew it was never going to be permanent, but I have been here a little over a year now, which I think is pretty good for a temp position
I am going to miss it.
This job has been really nice, much nicer than the last job I had
I have been working in an office, and this temp job was low stress, laid back, and I could pretty much work at my own pace
I'm worried the next job I get will stress me out

I also made only one friend at this place, and I am going to miss her
She is a middle aged lady who worked a couple cubicles down from me (one between us was empty)
We would talk about sports, how our weekends went, things going on around the office, the weather, and a bit about life in general
I found it hard to make friends in the office, and her reaching out and talking about even the smallest things was really nice.
I'm sad to move on, I've gotten quite comfortable here, but I am no longer needed
Time to start applying to some other palces and see what life has in store for me next

I(43) am trying to expand what I do with my wife(40) and take a more active roll in our relationship
How the heck do you try new foods, when you don't know what they are.
So I have not been a very active part in my relationship with my wife
I never really suggest things for us to do or make plans for places for us to go.
I know this has been really neglectful, and am taking action to fix this horrible situation
My question is, we in the past have only gone to like 5 different places to eat when we go out (mostly chains with are familiar with)
I would like to start taking my family out more and doing more activities with them
Start taking part in my family instead of just riding along
How the heck do you go to places that sell food you have no idea what it is
 Like I know there is an Indian Curry place that just opened, or a there are a whole lot of Pho places Greek
 Chinese
I know nothing about any of these foods, or even what we might like at places like this
It kind of maked me nervous because well we have been in a pattern that I know my wife wants me to break, by going to new places and making memories, but I don't want to go to a place we know nothing about and order chicken foot stew or something terrible that we would hate LOL

Paid off all my credit card debt today

At one point, all my combined CC debt was around 7 to 8K for many reasons
I've accumulated it in a span of 3 years.
I've bipolar and was previously not on medication which led to a lot of very bad and impulsive decisions - from huge shopping sprees to purposely missing my flight back home when I traveled because I wanted to stay a while longer
Oh, and quitting a couple of jobs and being unemployed for months at a time
On top of all of that, I started a side hustle business that didn't go as well as I thought.
Now, I'm stable and have found a good mix of medication that works for me (albeit having gained a bit of weight as a side effect but you can't have it all.) I've a job I like - low pressure and amazing work life balance but pays the same as my previous job that had WAY more pressure (e.g
working late til 10pm, working on weekends just to get things done on time.)
It's not all me, though
I'm lucky to have the support of family, friends, and generally the people around me
And the internet too
 Although I did not stick to one particular method of paying down CC debt, r/personalfinance was a really good resource
I actually did a little bit of the snowball method, and a little bit of the avalanche method.
Anywho, just wanted to say (or type) it out loud.
Hope everyone is doing well

Just had a phone interview
How do these usually go

So I just got done with a phone interview, but I'm not really sure how it goes
Does anyone do this for a living
 I heard her type like one thing for one of my questions, but after that she just kept firing off questions
Does that mean it went badly

Winter is coming
 With the weather changing and the days becoming overcast...
The gloomy weather can bring bouts of depression for some.
Always feel free to reach out and talk to someone, we're all here and in this together

What is something awesome (big or small) that has happened to you recently

I'm pretty new to posting on reddit, so I hope I'm doing it correctly.
I've been having a rough go mental-health wise lately, and I would love to hear some stories from people about great things that have happened to them recently
 Big or small - it doesn't matter.
I'm an idiot and I agreed to make a funeral slideshow/montage for my friend's great uncle's funeral and I have no idea how to do that.
So yeah the other day my friend is over at my apartment and we're down in the basement playing pool and he's telling me about how he's been saddled with planning most of his great uncle's funeral, and how it's really stressful, and how the guy who was supposed to make the photo/video montage dropped out and now he doesn't know what to do
I have no fucking clue why but my eyes light up and I blurt out, "I can make it for you
" And man I knew it was a mistake pretty much after the first syllable but fuckkkkk you can't just like stop yourself when you're already saying a sentence


 So anyway friendo guy throws his hands up to his face in relief and says, "Seriously
 Holy shit you're amazing
" And he hugs the shit outta me and I'm just thinking, ".....fuck" cause the last time I edited a video, it was in Windows Movie Maker which came out nearly 2 decades ago and has since been discontinued
Right so now I've got a week to make this thing, he's emailed me a folder with about 150 photos and 25 very short videos, and he's even requested that I use a few specific songs for background music.
I am not a smart man
My mouth definitely spoke before my brain could process it with this one, and now I'm afraid I'm going to fuck up my friend's great uncle's funeral sooooo yeah getting to the point, can anyone recommend a good free video editing software and also tell me how to use it

I can pay in a number of currencies: more stories about my own idiocy, bad jokes, maybe a few good jokes, some casual conversation, not necessarily good life advice but advice nonetheless, etc
I'm open to offers, as well as unrelated unsolicited life advice.
Let's go

I completed my 2nd half marathon this past Sunday and it felt amazing.
My 1st half marathon was one of the worst days of my life
I got my period the day before my run, giving me major cramps and killer lower back pain that I rarely get
I also got sick the day before the race because I got up at 2 am two days in a row before my run to cheer on my friends/family for finishing the 5k on Friday and 10k on Saturday.
Sunday morning when I got up I felt like utter crap, my whole body hurt and my throat was killing me
We got dressed and bussed over to Epcot then bussed over to MGK
I didnt train much for this race either, only running a max of 10k every once in a while
When we finally started at 5:30 am I walked/ran for almost 4 hours total in pain
Stopping at every med tent to grab bio freeze and rub it on my lower back
I also pulled a muscle on the left side of my butt around mile 11 and it hurt so bad my average pace went up almost 5-6 minutes.
For those of you who are reading this and have never ran a Disney race they require at least 16min per mile or else you will get swept from the course
They have two women who start very last called the "balloon ladies" and you have to stay ahead of them
If they pass you vut you are close enough to the finish they will let you finish I completed my second ever half marathon on the 3rd, Disneys Wine and Dine run weekend
I beat my time by 10 minutes, which is impressive considering I stopped for photos and such this time which sucked up a lot of time.
As soon as I saw spaceship Earth I knew I was almost done and that's when the balloon ladies passed me
I felt horrible that I didn't even finish before them
After I finished I felt horrible, everything hurt and I just wanted to go home and sleep
I didn't feel accomplished at all.
This was all last April.
I signed up for the Wine and Dine half marathon which I completed 4 days ago, finishing 10 minute before my last half, which included me stopping for photos and going to the bathroom, which I didn't do at all last race
I didn't even see the balloon ladies this time, which was amazing
I wasn't sick this time nor pulled any muscles
When I crossed the finish line I got an amazing rush and felt the best I ever have after a race, a true runners high.
This was a completely different experience for me and I am happy I didn't let the 1st run get in the way of me signing up for thus race
I also signed up for the April half marathon again and I will kick its ass even better

Thanks for reading, I hope you have a wonderful day.
Message or nah

Hey everyone, a year ago I was traveling and I met someone I became fast friends with
We kept in touch during my travels, but since I’m kinda trash our contact stopped
It’s been about 10 months since I last messaged her, but I’ve been thinking about her sometimes
Do I message her again and if so, how do I start, since I haven’t messaged in so long

I never have a normal experience at this coffee place
I go to this coffee shop pretty frequently, or at least used to, and every time that I go something odd always happens
Sometimes it’s my fault, sometimes it’s the barista’s fault, and sometimes it’s just an unfortunate interaction all together.
However today takes the cake with probably the most interesting experience I’ve had at this place.
Just for some background, a few weeks ago one of the baristas (lets call him Jake) gave me his number
We talked a bit, but I found out some things about him through stalking his Instagram that were dealbreakers
I told him that I don’t want to pursue anything with him, and that I didn’t want a boyfriend.
I decide to take one of my guy friends with me to this coffee shop just in case we see Jake
This coffee shop has a drive thru
My guy friend is 25 cents short of his drink, so he asks me to pay for his drink and he’ll pay me back
I was using my free drink stamp card
So I give the barista my card, instantly realize I only have $4 dollars in my checking account (the drink is 5.25)
Card gets declined, Batista seems uncomfortable, I tell him I’m gonna move some money around
He then tells me to just pull up to the main window and I can pay there
When he gives me my card back, I smack his hand by accident and my card flies into my backseat
Embarrassed, I thank him and pull forward.
This is where it gets interesting.
There are a few cars in front of me, so I can see who’s working at the window
My guy friend goes “Is that Jake
” And I look up and SURE ENOUGH IT’S JAKE
Freak out, put my car in park, jump to the very back of my car and cover myself up with my blanket
I tell my guy friend to drive my car for me and pay with my card
Meanwhile the people behind me were watching my guy friend get out of the car, go to the drivers seat and watch me fling myself to the back of my car
We get to the window, my guy friend pays with my card, which has my name on it
Jake asks my friend if he’s getting drinks for anybody and asks what he’s doing after getting the drinks
Jake definitely knows what my car looks like and definitely knows what my guy friend looks like because I have Jake on Snapchat and have posted pictures of him before
Jake probably thinks that my friend is my boyfriend, even though I told Jake that I wasn’t looking for a boyfriend.
Very interesting experience
Never going to that coffee shop alone again in case I happen to see Jake.
I wore a plain white t-shirt to the park today

I know this sounds really boring and very uneventful, but it was a big win for me
I wanted to go the the park today and read, and as I was getting ready to go, I was planning on wearing a button up shirt with a white undershirt
I was looking at myself in the mirror with just the undershirt on, and thought “fuck it” and just untucked it and wore that.
I’m a 19 year old male that has struggled really bad with my body image for years now, and as anyone who is a little overweight knows, a plain white t-shirt can be very revealing and can make you feel very uncomfortable
But I’ve been trying to eat better, and have been jogging a few days a week, and although I don’t look any different, I feel better.
I wore the plain white t-shirt and went to the park and sat and read Moby Dick for about an hour before getting up and walking around the little pond I was reading by
It felt great to be outdoors and enjoying the weather, and I didn’t feel self conscious at all
 I know it sounds really small and dumb but i really feel like a hundred bucks right now

I recently stopped caring about the way I look
It's so freeing.
I'm pretty sure that I'm unattractive
Obviously, I can't say for sure and it depends on the person
I would say that I'm probably about a 4/10
That used to pain me to say
For the past few years, I obsessed with hair gels, acne creams, and new clothes as if that would fix the way I look.
I would spend hundreds upon hundreds of dollars
None of it made me feel better
I eventuwlly realized that I didn't want to be attractive, I wanted to be complimented
As a man, people don't really compliment me
Especially since I'm not noticeably attractive
I even started to go a bit down the MGTOW rabbithole despite having a loving girlfriend
I felt like society hated me and would refuse me compliments just because I'm ugly.
I have a girlfriend who always called me attractive, but I never believed it
Now I realize what she meant
I am attractive
She's didn't stick with me for two years because I was sexy, that's not what really matters.
I started thinking about all of the most physically attractive men I know, the ones who get called cute all the time
Some of them I hated because they were total jerks, others I was good friends with
I realized that attractive men layed all across the likable-dislikable spectrum
Nobody really judged these men on their looks.
For so long I thought that being called cute and hot was so important
But as I started to actually listen to what most women were saying, I got the gist.
"He's cute, but a total prick" "He's super nice and hella sexy"
I was so obsessed with just one half of it
I'm not attractive because my hair looks good or my skin is clear
I'm attractive because of the person I am
I'm kind, caring, and sensitive
My girlfriend loves me because of that, my friends loved me because of that.
The only person that cared about the way that I looked was me.
So I stopped caring.
Today I went to school in sweatpants, a band t-shirt and bedhead
I felt great
I felt loved
From now on, it's just shower, shave, and a running fingers through my hair.
What is the music you listen to when you need a smile or some happiness
What is the band, artist, song, album or genre of music  that you listen to for a pick me up when you need a smile or some moments of happiness in your life
 Because we all need to smile or some happiness from time to time.
I learned what everyone in my company makes & I don't know how to move forward.
I'm kind of at a loss
I don't know what to do at this point, so I thought I could turn to reddit.
I've worked at my company for over half a decade and lately have felt under appreciated, and this is just the icing on the cake.
A little background:
I started out in an entry level sales position and worked hard to exceed expectations in that role but, the issue was, at that time we were expected to hit unreasonable goals with the workload we had
So, I presented to my boss and recommended we create a position to take away some of the tasks that kept us from hitting goals and said that I was happy to step into this position to help
 They gave me an amazing opportunity to create this position, which I am super grateful for, especially coming freshly out of high school
Fast forward 3 years, and now it is it's own department and assists all facets of our company.
Within this time of creating this department, I have been pulled in so many different directions to assist in different departments, and everytime I've agreed to help
At one point, They split up my department under another manager because they thought that would be the best idea to have me manage one portion of the department, as well as be in part time in sales to help bring in revenue, and the other manager take over another portion
Let's just say, it didn't work out well...at all
I was asked to step back in full time (taken back out of sales) and take over to fix the department
Most recently, we were purchased by a company, which gives us promising opportunities to go and buy other companies to grow our business
They 'asked me' to move BACK to sales full time (no commision, only salary) because, they wanted to ensure I'm safe from a possible merger in departments, and have asked that I also help with integrating businesses we acquire (whenever that comes through because there is no timeline.) Then, they placed someone else over my department that I created
Fine
So I take my role back in sales at square one, again, work to grow new accounts, again, (while others are working accounts that I previously had and grew) all the while, also watching from the sideline as someone else run my department
(For the second time)
So needless to say, I'm approaching my breaking point here
I spoke to my old manager and explained this to him so he knew where I stood
He said he would try to get me answers on this new position with the integrations, which ultimately really could lead to something really cool, but I would be creating everything from scratch again.
With all of that being said, yesterday I randomly get a letter with my company's return address
Inside there is a letter and then a print out of everyone's personal information, as well as, an outline of EVERYONE'S salaries
There is no signature or outline of who sent the letter.
The first thing I do it call my old manager (An executive at the company) and let him know what I've received and tell him I'd bring him the letter for him to have to investigate.
As far as I know, no one else has received a letter as well.
My issue here, is with feeling under appreciated and now learning what everyone makes, How do I move past this
 One person who started in the past two months, makes 10k more than I do
There are other people in sales, who I started the same time as, And they make over 50K more than I do.
Sometimes I think about what Jackie Chan might be doing.
He might be out there filming another awesome movie doing kickass stunts and flips or he might just be chilling out reading a book or something
I dunno, either way, I'm just happy to know he's out there somewhere.
Heard a coworker excitedly tell me about how SOMEONE helped them in their need and smiled inside knowing it was ME (and a few others)

First of all, let me be clear: I’m not doing this for any Reddit karma, likes, to feel better,  etc
I’m so happy and wanted to share.
I work a tough job where it’s almost all commissions
We all generally do well
Sometimes we don’t.
Yesterday, a coworker sent a few of us an email about another coworker, letting us know this has been an incredibly difficult few months, and things had become pretty dire
Like, no food in the house and no money to buy groceries kind of dire, I don’t have much left after bills and such, but I’m VERY well stocked on food, I filled a giant bag full of as much food as I could fit and stealthily left it at his desk
No one saw, especially not him.
Today, we’re shooting the shit, and all of a sudden he says, “Hey, I’ve got something pretty incredible to tell you,” and proceeds to tell me how rough things have been, and then (with tears in his eyes) tells me about this mystery grocery bag that’s shown up
He doesn’t stop there...there were mystery envelopes with gift cards, cash, gas cards, and even tickets to an event his child was a part of that he couldn’t afford tickets to

It made me so happy to hear that others in that little email thread responded just like I did...in secret
I wasn’t even the only one to bring him groceries

Just wanted to share
I’ll probably never tell him.
I Found out a Woman I Idolize has applied to be the Executive Director at my Job
I work for a small non-profit that is comprised of two separate programs
The director of program x, and the director of program y are incredibly competent and passionate about helping our clients
A woman who has worked for our county solicitor and is very involved with the community and our agency, has applied for the executive director position
Because she is very well loved and respected by our agency, I would be super surprised if she didn't get the job
Assuming she does get this position, I will be working for a stellar cast of management
Because we're small, we all work with the executive director, and see them daily, so this change will actually affect me.
I only recently began working for this agency, but worked for them for 5 years in the past
I got my original job back, (the job I loved, and regretted getting promoted out of and eventually leaving altogether due to that promotion)
A couple Redditors gave me advice on how to approach the interview process as a returning employee, and I'm so glad I went for it
I'm back in a job I love, with a staff I love, doing a job that matters, and working for wonderful people
I couldn't be happier
I may have taken a demotion to come back, but not much of a drop in salary, and it's definitely worth it to be happy.
I just wanted to share because I'm really happy at the moment, and all I ever see on Reddit regarding jobs are mostly about frustration
This doesn't really fit r/jobs, since it's not looking for or giving job advice, so I'm posting it here.
Heyyyyy you are amazing:)
Hi everyone :) I hope you had an amazing day and remember that you're amazing and you are loved
Life may be shit right now but it will get better
I always tell myself this when I feel down, life has its highs and lows
It just takes time
You will find the light at the end of your tunnel :) this was cheesy asf but like yeaaaaa
Anyways, feel free to hmu in the comments or pm me

Today I might have got the gig I've been waiting for.
I'm a videographer in the UK, and today after coming home from university my housemate, also a filmmaker, had a brief chat with me about how he'd been offered this gig in London (we live in Bristol) but had to turn it down because he couldn't get there.
I asked him what it was and it was a live gig recording for some promotional material for a support band down in Camden
After embellishing more he said we'd also get the opportunity to film the main act for our reels - who just so happened to have like 72,000,000 listens on Spotify on one track, and millions on the rest - and a band I really freaking like.
So I leapt on it, I asked him to call back the guy who offered the job, if it was still available and if the pair of us could have it; we snatched it up, piled into my car, sped across the city during rush hour to rent out some gear, and drove all the way down to Camden - sorting everything else out on the way.
It was so impromptu, and a great experience, and everything went so well
I have to say it was a bit of a power trip getting those press passes at the venue and being able to just walk in and out past security, and through the crowds
It felt kind of weird being on the other side of the barrier for once too, I go to a lot of gigs and often get caught up watching the photographers wondering what it's like to be there; I guess now I know

I've been waiting for so long for a good opportunity to blast forward my portfolio and get more into live music videography, it's such a dream to go on the road with a band and just churn out content of everything and anything along the road - and now I have this little gem that can get me one step closer.
Have you ever had something as sudden and impulsive like this totally affect your career or life
 I'd love to chat about how little quick things, like me just happening to get home at the perfect time to get gear, into London, and into the gig
Happy little coincidences that just lined things up for you.
I'm seeing a slow but progressive increase in my weight



I'm a D1 baseball athlete and I am well below thr avg for weight
Our program focuses on running a lot so it's hard to gain weight here, but some how I'm seeing it progress up
I'm so excited that this is a positive trend because I'm really pushing myself to gain more
If y'all have any tips or tricks on how to gain weight pretty quickly, please let me know.
Give me something to listen to...
I love music and love discussing it
Though lately I haven't been listening to as much new music as I would like to - so help me change that
 Shoot me something and I'd like to discuss the song/artist, what we like/dislike, etc...
My favorite genre is Electronic, mainly house, techno, and guilty pleasure of dubstep
But I am open to all and frequently enjoy (most) genres (except country, sorry...)
So comment your current favorite song or something you think I have to listen to

I met Curtis Granderson at my work today

He's apparently a professional baseball player who was voted as the "Most Friendly Player"
He brought a group of around 15 kids around my job (I work at a grocery store) to teach them about nutrition and have them taste different foods
Then he had the kids pick out healthy foods they wanted and I'm pretty sure he bought the food for them
He seemed really nice
 Then they had a fundraiser to address food insecurity
Have any of you had casual interactions with famous people you didn't know were famous

Poor quality clothing
Anyone else notice a decline in the material used to make clothing the last few years 
 My skin is very sensitive and I’m finding it harder and harder to find clothes made out of pure cotton 
I cannot tolerate all the rayon/ polyester / acrylic sweaters
 Even basic tees are now made of a cotton blend with some other cheap material 
All cotton socks have become harder to find as well .
Just had my first lucid dream
I'm writing this 10 minutes after waking up from it,
I fought a brown and strong person and we sometimes did big jumps and even flew in our fight,
then I get out of the building I fought in and I looked to the fast changing sky when it hit me, I said to myself,
This is too real, then I looked on my hand to notice I had 6 fingers and details were corrupt.
that's when I noticed I was in a lucid dream, I screamed fly and flew up and up and unfortunately the dream stopped.
I moved out of my apartment alone tonight
Hey there

Some background: I bought a house and closed today, making me officially a first time home owner
My parents, girlfriend, and a few friends are planning on helping me move tomorrow.
I decided to load up my car and uhaul tonight
I found it much more relaxing and less stressful than moving with others
 Bringing a 100lb dresser down my stairs changed from "are they going to drop this on me and will I throw my back" to using moving blankets to slowly slide the dresser down my stairs
 Right now, all my soreness is in my legs and not my back, not to mention that half as many wall and furniture dings happened compared to last time
The problem solving for bring all this furniture down was pretty fun too.
Pretty reasonable experience relative to how moving usually goes since I could take my time.
I prefer practical gifts over trinkets
I don't like trinkets because I feel guilty not using gifts, and trinkets aren't very useful so they don't get used.
Give me a practical gift that I can't afford or that is too difficult for me to get or a small luxary item.
If you don't know what I would find practical than cash is the next best thing
(Not gift cards because I don't want money that's tired to a specific store)
I got rejected from all of the colleges I took an interview to, so theres that.
So my resume was accepted to three colleges which I was very looking forward to- so I went and did the interview, and tada, I got the rejection mail today
I live in Korea and I wanted to study English professionally- but seems like fate didn't want that at all
So here I am, a half-failure
I want to cry.
The Office Great Grannie loves everyone back


 If you read or commented on my post you have to read this

If you didn’t see the post about my great grandma loving the office and thinking it’s a real reality show, find it
You might like what you read
😊
For those that have commented and the thousands of upvotes, THANK YOU



 I thought about posting about her for a couple weeks
Not sure if people would have negative things to say or would think it’s funny
But the word I seen most today is WHOLESOME and tears
It made me happy I shared
It made me realize how something that was just something that I did a few times a week was a lot more special than I realized
Many comments were beautiful and made me feel so good about myself and how I’ve been going about things with great grannie
I feel like I’ve done something right in my life
But it was never a chore, I just enjoyed our time together and us watching The Office together made so many people smile today
 I was happy to do that
The world needs more smiles
 I spent a lot of my day replying to as many as i could
Such an overwhelming response
  So today I made a trip down to see her and show her all the love from everyone
13k+ upvotes, gold, silver and platinum awards and so many wonderful comments.I showed up to the home and it was the usual stuff
Saying hi to the old folks I’ve gotten to know and the nurses
 I walk into grandmas room and she happens to be watching Deadpool and says to me “have you seen this Spider-Man rip-off
 He’s real funny and uses guns but he’s no spider man
”  Then I explain deadpool to her and she laughs it off and we pause the movie
I pause it because I wanted to share everything everyone said about her or I today
I explained what Reddit was and at first she said “you’re talking about me on the cell to strangers



” Kind of mad
Then I explain no one knows who she is or anything personal
 Then (without revealing that the office is a show and not a reality show) I start reading off comments to her
I say “nan, these are all strangers that love you because of what I said about you
”  She says “you better not of told any lies
” I say, “it’s just about how we love The Office”
I proceed to read comments to her and she gets quiet about about 10
I ask her why she’s quiet and she says “this is just so lovely, all these strangers are saying that
” So I read more, selectively of course and after about an hour of reading comments from here and r/Dundermifflin she gets real quiet while all along I see tears running down her face
I ask if I should stop and she says “no, keep going” so I did
 She cried and cried
And I cried
She said she didn’t think anything she did mattered anymore
She was just waiting to die because so many of her grand and great grand children don’t call or visit but all these strangers said such nice things about her
I told her she means the world to me and I really realized how important she was to me and my daily life
 She asked “why about the office though
 It’s just a show on tv.” I told her because people don’t see things how she does
I told her people loved her sass and thought it was awesome
 Still crying she says “I know I don’t remember things like I used to
I’m aware of that and I forget a lot of things
Sometimes I forget the days you come see me” I told her it’s ok, because she’s giving me very happy memories and she still beats me at chess so she’s still sharp as a tack
 Then she laughed and said “you’re a very smart boy but I do kick your ass in chess, Mr
Bishop”
 Things lightened up a little from there
She wanted to respond to everyone that replied but I told her I spent most of the day replying with thank yous and how I was happy I made people smile
She responds with “good boy
You’re a good man
We need to find you a Pam to marry” LOL
I agreed.
She said to let you all know from the bottom of her heart she thanks everyone for the kind words and not passing her off as an old woman who doesn’t remember things from one minute to the next
She appreciates every single comment.
I read a few comments that said she’s Reddit’s great grandma now and she said you’re all her great grand children and she loves all of you.
We finished up deadpool and she had funny things to say about it which I’ll post later
We also watched Product Recall from The Office
Tomorrow I’ll post her comments 😊
It’s been a crazy emotional day for me personally
I didn’t think I’d get the feedback that I received
It was great
 You’re all awesome

In the bus with 1k teens
So I had to take this bus thinking I was gonna be late and it was already full, then a 100 kids and teens show from nowhere and its fucking awful
Thanks for listening
Any tips
 Lol
Do we have any country music fans
 How do you like the pop country
 I kind of miss the old stuff
I've been listening to Alan Jackson, George Strait, Reba, all the old singers
Now they're coming out with all of this pop country
I'm kind of getting annoyed by it.
I need to practice drawing
Taking drawing request
I want to practice
example of my style
https://www.pixiv.net/member.php
id=26265050
I want to be a professional artist but my skill lacks
I also do want to get some follower, but I don't know how to attract follower.
knight_in_full_armor
cat_soldier
american_kastel
goblin_slayer
Someone told me I'm stupid for misspelling "Yes" by typing "Yosh" instead
The thing is "Yosh" is a Japanese word which roughly means "All right
" and is used to encourage oneself or others.
As the title says, someone had the nerve to call me stupid by saying I misspelled "Yes"
I find it annoying tbh and I have no idea where I can vent it out.
Like I appreciate being corrected because that means I learn something new
But being called "stupid" and at the same time condemning me for a mistake under the wrong assumptions
 Nuh-uh
This is unacceptable

Please if you're gonna correct someone, do it in a way that they'll thank you for telling them
And most of all, make sure you know what you're talking about before correcting them.
Ugh, so annoying.
That's all
Thanks for reading.
Homeless man
Okay so this is going to sound super weird at first
Basically this is what happened
I own a townhouse
My basement is the garage for our car and a small area separated by a door that is also part of the basement.
I ran into a homeless man the other day and it’s starting to get kind of cold here so I offered him to crash in the garage if he left through the garage door and didn’t come upstairs
I locked the basement door to the garage as well as the door to the upstairs just to be safe and I know I sound bad for doing that
I just wanted to be safe because I have a wife and 2 kids
Anyhow I let him come in and out for almost 2 weeks without my wife even noticing
She works during the day but he usually would come “home” towards the night time hours and we were up on the 3rd floor by then so she never noticed him coming and going.
Anyhow I go down there to smoke in the garage and yesterday I was smoking when he came back to sleep
He came in and told me that he found a job and it was all because of me
He said before he was sleeping outside and would’ve never been able to do what he did if I never let him have a warm place to crash
Granted my basement isn’t much, let alone my garage.
but I guess I just felt really good about it and I didn’t know where to share this information
At school on a Friday
Right now, I'm at school in our auditorium waiting for school to start
I'm listening to Pandora as it slowly fills up
Anyway, I predict this is just going to be an easy day with not that much work
What are you guys doing this Friday

Is it weird that I haven’t genuinely cried in years

Yea like tha title said I haven’t cried in years
The last time I can genuinely remember myself crying from sadness/being overwhelmed is in middle school 6th or 7th grade
Idk I’ve had pets die and relatives pass(not major ones to me anyway) and I just haven’t felt the need to cry or if I’m being honest feel sad
I’m not a psychopath or anything because I do feel emotions
It’s just that when it comes to being sad I don’t really process it
One moment I remember distinctly was when my dog of about 3 years got hit by a truck and killed
My whole family including my dad was crying for him and I was just there watching it all
I was sad yea but I never even had a tear drop fall
My mom saw it and asked why I wasn’t crying
I didn’t have a response
I had washed, fed, and played with this dog the most but for some reason it affected me the least
Idk if this is really suppose to go in here as most of the posts here are light hearted so I wouldn’t be surprised if this got removed
Is it weird that I haven’t cried in years

Superpowers
Superpowers, for me, are wonderful
Superpowers can make life easier
You can use your superpowers to help people
You can also use it for your personal reasons.
But superpowers can be troublesome at times
Oh you turned invisible
 Great, now you're blind
You can make reality whatever you wanted to with just a thought
 Wonderful, you caused world war 3
I feel superpowers is both a curse and a blessing.
But aren't superpowers just unique abilities
 Or is it a trait
 Is it genetical
 No one knows

An update :)
So 67 days ago I made my first post This post expressed that I wasn’t feeling fulfilled in life and that I expressed thoughts about quitting
Well I finally went through with it, I withdrew from my classes and I’m taking a break from college to truly see what I want because IT is definitely not the route I want to go
I’m dabbling in quite a lot of options now including YouTube, Streaming, Electrician, Web Development, and other things
My parents think dropping out of school for me was a huge mistake and that I “won’t have or be shit in life” and “end up like my drug addicted dad”
They words hurt really bad but I understand that their just trying to do what’s best for me even if it don’t feel like it rn
I’m determined to prove them wrong and I’m going to make something of myself with or without a degree
Thanks for listening to me ramble on and I hope u guys have a great day :)
Need help deciding a research topic

Hello Reddit
Was wondering if anyone wanted to help me choose a topic to research for my college writing class
It’s a baby research paper; 3-5 pages
I kind of want to research something philosophical that makes the brain think a lot
If anyone has any ideas it’d be much appreciated, thank you

An update to my vaping situation
2 months ago I made a post saying I hadn’t vaped in 14 hours
Well, just wanted to say that I’m still going
 I honestly thought I’d break, but I’ve made it this far now, no going back.
Also, it saves me lots of money haha
Bad job interview story
I had a job interview today
Suffice to say it did not go well and the experience left me doubting myself
To begin with, I take a lot of pride in my work - the management in my current job is not  good but i still work much better than most of my colleagues while being much younger than them
This interview was not the first round I had for this role but some of the questions asked left a really bad taste in my mouth
I am quite sure that I won't be getting the role but I feel humiliated, not of the rejection but the premise of it.
Shitty day today - will end it with ice cream.
Recently Applied for a New Job and Feeling Anxious
I have been working full time at the same retail store for almost 2 years as I've been working on my online CS degree and I recently applied for a full time IT position in a college and I am really excited, but I'm still trying to keep an open mind
I don't want to set myself up for heavy disappointment, especially since I'm a bit under qualified
It's been two days and today is the last day you could even apply.
Have you guys been nervous about anything like this lately

I am scared to go to bed
So I'm a 21 year old dude who had a nightmare earlier this week (something about an old scary witch)
Normaly I wouldn't think about it too much, but this time I am too scared to go to bed even if I know it was just a dream
On top of that I live in a small, new appartement in downtown of a big canadian city, so no weird sounds or shapes like in an old house
Despite all that I waited until 1am to go to sleep yesterday
Funny thing is I'm not "scared" like I used to as a child, instead I'm more annoyed that I won't get enough sleep on a weekday.
How do you enjoy things without thinking about monetizing it

I'm 22 and I grew up on the notion that I have to be great at a hobby and be able to monetize said hobby.
It sounds ridiculous that making money should be a factor in how I enjoy things
Or that I have to be great at it.
I want to be able to enjoy hobbies simply because I enjoy them
I can't seem to get rid of this need to be the best at it or to be recognized for doing it
My goal is to sit down and enjoy it simply because it's fun to do.
My apartment's walls are so thin it bothers me so much
I'm living in a small apartment where there are only 3 rooms each floor
I'm currently living in the middle one
I can hear the person on my left singing everyday with his loud voice until 3 am
I can hear the right one everytime he washes his dishes.
I love singing, but because of this I can't do it even with the smallest voice
Usually I just sing when I'm in the shower, thinking maybe the bathroom walls are more thick, but recently my left neighbor did the same and I could hear it from my room, even tho his bathroom is located in the opposite direction according to the floor map
This got me thinking maybe all this time they could hear me when I'm singing while showering.
I really don't like to bother people and it's really embarassing if some strangers actually heard me singing everyday
Lately I've been trying to sing in a even smaller voice, in fact I just did it 2 hours ago but NOW I can hear my left neighbor humming

 Does that mean they also could hear my small singing voice


 THIS IS DRIVING ME CRAZY, I REALLY WANT TO MOVE


P.s
Also not only singing, my left one is really LOUD while doing literally everything
Cooking, using sink, calling s/o, laughing, complaining and talking to himself, EVEN SIGHING, I could hear literally everything
He freaking annoys me so much I want to report him
But then again I'm afraid he's going to say "but she also sings very loudly everyday

".
I am qualified as a pianist/musician
Not that qualification as in certificates but it’s about how my teacher consider me as musician.
Just a little background on why this is so much of a deal to me
Basically I started playing piano in early 2017
My sister knows that I can actually play piano so she was excited to tell me that the place that we were having a feast has a grand piano so people to play
Of course, I got excited too
After finishing eating, I asked the manager if I can play the piano.
“That piano is only for pianist to play, you can take picture with it though”
She said.
I had nothing to reply and I just went away without playing it, I felt so bad because I felt that I am not an actual pianist.
Ok now is the main subject
It was my school’s speech day when people take prizes and give speeches
At the end of the main speech, everyone can go to this place to have a buffet
My job was to play background music for them along side with my friends and teachers
I actually started off playing alone, I messed up here and there and I noticed people were testing mics while I was performing
After I finished performing, the teacher (let call him Mr Cellist) asked me come to so he can talk to me.
“I think I rushed too much”
I started off
“No, that is not the main problem
But remember that you shouldn’t be so disheartened by people being inconsiderate during your performance”
He replied
I just nodded my head.
After a few segments of performance another teacher (she plays piano) was ranting to Mr Cellist about how inconsiderate the people are so my friend and I just joined in for the tea so that four of us stand in a circle.
“Only people who learn music would appreciate the amount of work you put in for the performance”
Mr Cellist finally said
“But there are only a few of us who learn music”
I replied “That’s why we are standing in circle”
He said.
My brother regained feeling in his legs after being paralyzed and I’m just overwhelmed.
So, about a year ago, my younger brother (16 now) was injured
His friends were playing with a gun, and one of them accidentally shot him
The bullet damaged his spinal cord, and the doctor said there was no chance he’d have feeling from the waist down again
Today, my little brother told me he’s started to regain feeling recently, and he’s now able to move his legs again (not long and not much, it exhausts him)
I’ve already gotten all of my crying out, but I don’t really have close friends I wanted to talk to about this, so I wanted to share and chat with my reddit family
Sorry about formatting, I’m on my phone outside of my office.
New job

I got a new job that I’ve been trying for over a month
 I got the offer today
 I’m so excited I want to cry

I lost my job a month ago and have been working for a temp service since then
I’m keeping my fingers crossed that I’ll make enough next week to cover rent

What have y’all done when you’ve been down in the financial dumps to make it from bill to bill

I've finished most of my mock GCSE exams

Hello

I'm quite happy today as I've finally finished the majority of my mock exams for my GCSEs.
On Monday I had two exams; RE where I had two papers, one on Ethics and Life and Death, and one on Islam
The first paper was alright but the second paper was kind of difficult because there was a bit of terminology that I didn't know
I also had a Maths Calculator paper which I found quite hard as I struggle with Maths quite a bit and some of the topics like Vectors we weren't taught.
On Tuesday I had three exams; Biology, Physics and English Langauge
I found Biology relatively easy as I really love Biology so I revised a lot for that
Physics was a bit more difficult because half of it was on circuitry, a weak point of mine but the second half was on radiation which I found much easier
English Language was fine to do, especially the creative writing question at the end where I had to write a 'news article' on how people with skills and talent deserve to be more famous.
On Wednesday I only had one exam which was Chemistry, which was a lot easier than I expected, but still quite difficult
I only had one that day because it should have been my GCSE Option A Exam, but that would have been art and I had already done that the previous week.
On Thursday I had Geography and Maths Non-Calculator
Geography I had revised a lot for so it was OK, but Maths was awful
Two topics, Functions and Exponential Graphs we had not been taught, and the last five or so questions I could just not do so I dropped about 25 marks from not doing questions.
Today I had Spanish Reading and Writing and English Literature
I found Spanish Writing a lot easier than the reading paper but the Reading paper had a few words I didn't know
All in all, I found Spanish a little harder than expected, but still doable as I love Spanish and revised a lot for it
English Literature was a lot bettter than I first expected
In the paper we had a two questions, one on Macbeth and one on the Sign of Four
I feel I did better on the Macbeth questions because we had covered that more recently in English lessons.
Overall, I think I did alright in my exams, and I will keep you updated on what grades I get when i eventually get them back.
TLDR; Had some exams this week, I think they went alright.
Today I overcame my artblock and absolutely nailed it

I've been pretty busy lately with dealing with emotions along other problems like my anxiety, so I barely managed to pick myself up and draw anything (and that's my favourite hobby)
So I went on and found a picture of a friend of mine and just TRIED, and nailed it IMO
I'm pretty satisfied and happy
Thank you for coming to my TedTalk.
Forgot my seat belt
I feel the need to share this story so I will do so here
I was sitting in mathematics class and just randomly I started panicking because I wasn't wearing a seat belt, then I realized I wasn't in a car and I felt really stupid
It was very strange
Thanks for coming to my Ted talk
Hungry kid in Mexico, the gum and the chocolate milk .
I remember when I was a kid , for context im Mexican
 And we were visitting mexico on a little family vacation,  and started in puerto vallarta and ended in Guadalajara
 In my mothers town in the state of Jalisco I remember a bustling market with all of these amazing smells and things to taste , and a lady selling liquidated chocolate milk with pancho pantera powder (mexican nesquik) 
I looked at her make one for a customer and asked my dad for one since it looked super delicious

Well I grab the chocolate milk and i remember the cinnamon powder she sprinkled on top got on my nose when I went for a sip of this bubbly drink 
I turned around and was slapped by reality, there was a child there in sandals
We were about the same age , he had a brown bimbo bread shirt on with a lot of little holes in it
His lips were a little dry and his face was dirty
I was still drinking choco milk as our eyes met and he shook his little box of chiclets and asked if I wanted to buy one .
I said no and then he stared at my drink for a second and asked if he could have one
I was a kid and really didnt think about it, I asked my dad and he bought him and his little sister a chocolate milk who was also there at the end of another stall selling chiclets 
And they were not happy, but looked relieved
And that was that
 I often find myself thinking about that boy, bout the same age
Different circumstances and opportunities in life.
Ive always wished I could find him and ask him how his life turned out, if he made it out 
And tell him im glad that chocolate milk could give him just a bit of relief.
My boss’s boss asked me to center a photo in a email today
I pretended it took an hour and took a nap
Thought rotating PDFs for boomers were always kinda a joke
 Our web guy is on medical leave for 6 weeks and I had said I could cover if anything critical came up, know some technical stuff like basic html and css.
2 hours into him being gone I got a call from his boss
To center a photo in an email...
this is going to be a long 6 weeks.
I just gave my dad a great birthday present
He turned 46 today, and has lately been complaining a lot about the fact that my stepmom throws his boxers away because 'they are old and some have small holes'
So anyway, my brother and I gave him a birthday card and batman boxers
Usually it doesn't matter how much I think about a present or how much time I put into it, I always get the same reaction
It isn't bad and he's happy, but today was kind of better.
I think he found it a lot more funny and thoughtful(
) I don't know for sure but he was really happy and that made me happy too.
Sadly I didn't have a lot of time for him today, and it's 10 pm already and he just went to bed, so I guess we're gonna celebrate tomorrow.
Thanks for reading

I was ghosted yesterday and I feel great.
I was ghosted yesterday
A guy I was talking to for weeks and had definitive plans to meet with tonight blocked my number and account on social media
I was actually looking forward to the date and am at a stage in my life where I feel ready to be vulnerable with a person, so this move really blindsided me.
I won't lie
It STUNG
But, after a day with 25 wild and warm hearted kindergarteners, I walked out of work feeling my self-esteem and confidence in myself restored
Had this happened a year ago today, I think I would have been really hard on myself for a while, but seeing myself carry on with a harder shell and successfully participating in the self care that I know works, has me feeling great and quite proud of myself.
To anyone else reading this who is feeling dejected: acknowledge your sucky feelings, but know that you are so worthy and are strong enough to get through this
(also ghosting sucks
Please don't be mean.)
Happy Weekend

Tomorrow I'm going to my very first bachelor party and I organized it.
Since I'm the best man to one of my closest friend, I organized his bachelor party.
We are a group of 10, going to a nearby big town getting drunk and eating a particular kind of italian BBQ.
I hope I didn't shit the bed on the setup and such, but I know that the future groom will love seeing 10 of his friends since he practically never leaves the house.
Thrift shopping is my zen
Do you thrift shop
 Do you enjoy thrift shopping 
 What do you thrift shop for 
 Thrift shopping is very calming and relaxing to me and exciting when I find something for myself or for someone I know
I love the thrill of the hunt and it puts me in a better mood and I find it healing in a way.
We did it
 I have a wonderful private room with a patio, a wonderful partner, and my dog.
The landlords here are great, open minded people who don't mind that we smoke weed and cigarettes, and have a dog.
I'm just so excited to finally be moving forward like this, having our own space and a little area for my dog to relax as well
It's a dream come true after searching and searching for an apartment that would have likely not had any of these perks.
Canada vs USA: Chicken sandwich
with the new popeyes chicken sandwich hype, i got confused cuz Canada already had a popeyes chicken sandwich and after seeing reviews on it, I thought it was weird how chicken sandwiches in Canada are more like deluxe chicken sandwiches with tomato, lettuce, sauce while the American ones are just butter and pickles
Thinking of buying an RPG for mobile phone - are the controls hard to use compared to a console

I haven’t really played games for about 20 years, but figured mobile gaming would be a good way to get back into it
Was going to start with a final fantasy game (maybe VII) since those were always my favorites, but I just can’t picture how the controls would work on a phone (iPhone X if it makes a difference)
Do you need a separate controller or does it work okay just using the phone
 Just seems like it wouldn’t be very intuitive without a controller in my hand
 Just wanted to ask someone before I spend money on a game
Thanks.
5 years ago I took a data entry job that paid $10/hr
Today I accepted a branch manager position

I'm so excited
 but I have to wait for my regionals to announce it before I can tell anyone other than close family (and strangers on the internet)
 How was your Friday

Mcdonald's jr chickens
i just did a post on chicken sandwiches and i remembered how jr chickens are only in Canada
How does America live knowing that they haven't tried a jr chicken
a mcchicken does not even compare
I bought my first car today

I’m in my early twenties and the idea of getting a loan, insurance, test driving, safe guarding yourself against getting swindled, etc has been super draining
But I DID IT
 my old car was from 2000
This car is from 2018
 I’m still amazed at the new ability to listen to the music from my phone through my car haha
 Just wanted to share.
A Moment Of Human Kindness
I had been memorizing my study guide for my Information Technology course for the past week and a half because the quiz is nearly identical
I had the answers on lock
I got to class and one of my classmates said, “Did you notice the repeated question
” I casually said “No.” But my mind was racing, panicking.
Opened up the quiz module and sure enough, the question was totally new to me
I scrolled down, none of the questions were from the guide I studied
I studied for quiz 4 instead of quiz 3
I felt my inner being plummet into the void
So I did what I could and waited for the class to end so I could speak with my professor.
I told her my situation and she sympathized for me
She asked how I did on my previous two quizzes and I told her my scores of 97 and 100
She said since I did well on my prior quizzes and I show up for class each day, I could take it again next week
Right there, I felt the kindness in human nature lift my inner being out of the void.
Young students, if you show up for lectures and put in the effort I’ve found teachers and professors will help get you by.
Thanks for reading

I had the strangest dream last night and for the first time in a while, I remember the dream vividly.
My sleep schedule has recently shifted
I started a new job and I am trying to focus more on my sleep habits because I’m getting up earlier to commute
I went to sleep at around 10:30pm
I dreamt that I was going to get my hair done but had to go to my hairdressers house for some reason
I unknowingly parked in his mother’s parking spot and she came home from running errands and was very agitated due to this
I felt so uncomfortable
Then I saw they had a cat but it was huge
Like big dog sized but looked like a Disney version of a Siamese cat
Its neck was super long but it was very real with fur and everything
Then, as I was petting it, one of its front legs pulled off and there was a wound in the legs place
The leg was so tiny compared to its body
I was gutted (figuratively)
I would never hurt an animal knowingly
Then the family was very angry with me
The hairdresser washed my hair and dyed it and in the process drenched me with water
He cut my hair a little then left
I felt I had to wait for him to come back but I felt so uncomfortable and out of place
No one would talk to me
Then there were a bunch of kids running around me with water guns and I tried to tell them nicely to stop but they ignored me
I kept just feeling uneasy, uncomfortable, and unwelcome but I couldn’t leave because I HAD to get my hair done
 Then I woke up at 11:45
I can’t stop thinking about this dream because of the strong emotions I felt during
So weird


Changing how I carry myself changed my life
So for most of my life (not that much since I’m in high school) I really didn’t care about how I looked and I had very little confidence
However the summer before this school year I decided to change myself for the better, I cut my hair shorter, started dressing better, started going to the gym more, and in general changed my mindset on how I choose to live my life
This change definitely helped me a lot, before I would just dress like everybody else and essentially try my hardest to blend in with the crowd, but after I don’t care how people see me
I don’t try to look and act like every other “preppy southern guy” and it’s amazing I’ve gotten a lot more compliments from friends and even people I don’t know and am a happier and more confident person overall.
Why can’t I have a passion and just stick to it

So many times have I gotten extremely invested in something and been absolutely loving it and then bam
Just like that I’ve lost all passion and motivation for it
I’m so sick of it
I wish I was able to be passionate about something for more than 3 weeks...
I've been studying all day and now lack human interaction
Let's talk

I'm preparing an exam and spent the whole day at home
Now i'm feeling chatty so i thought i might give this a try
I'm in med school and i'm a girl in my 20s so yeah
Johnnie Walker Blue Label
Y’all
I’m a college student who just accidentally ordered a shot of blue label
I had no clue it would be 70 bucks holy hell.
Thankfully I could afford it
It was so smooth thoooooo fr.
Have y’all ever ordered a drink and didn’t realize it would be so expensive

Oh my god I’m so sad and shocked and happy rn wtf
Ahhhhhh ;(
My life feels like it is going nowhere
I am currently 19, still studying in my country's local polytechnic year 1
I used to be an avid gamer, playing games till 5am
I also used to be a clubber but not hardcore, only going once or twice a month
I recently joined my family's business and started earning a steady income
I stopped playing games, I stopped clubbing and the worst of all I stop chasing girls
I no longer have urges to have one night stands like I used to anymore, I don't even touch my computer besides using it to play songs in my room and I stopped going to the club already
I feel like I don't have anything I enjoy anymore
Really any advice helps.
My job application was denied after not even 12 hours of submitting it.
Kind of annoying considering it took a lot of dedication for me to even submit one in the first place
I kind of thought it would have just been over with and I would be on my way
But I guess not.
Anyway how was your day

I got employee of the month at my fairy new job and I could not be more ecstatic
I started this job a few months ago
It is by far the most physically, mentally, and emotionally draining job I have had but also has the best work environment and is a passion of mine
Everyday I leave feeling like I could’ve done more, my boss thinks I’m an idiot, or I’m under qualified, but everyday I leave loving my job wholeheartedly anyways
This is a field I want to do for the rest of my life and this is my first job in this field
Getting employee of the month just made my year and I had to tell someone.
Cover songs
Right now, I just want to hear Joan Jett cover Limp Bizkit's Break Stuff
But anyway, I like a really good cover
Not someone else just trying to duplicate the song, but really own it, you know

Some of my favorite covers are CSN doing the Beatles' Blackbird and Traffic's Dear Mr
Fantasy, Big Sir doing Jefferson Starship's Jane, and Noah Guthrie's take on I'm Sexy and I Know It by LMFAO
What do you guys like

i just watched 12 episodes of Plastic Memories and i have made a grave mistake
i know exactly what's going to happen in the next episode and im terrified
i've been internally screaming for the past 20 minutes
i can't watch
pls send help
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
Talked to the cute barista today 

Today, I started to make conversation with this cute barista that works at the Starbucks I usually go to study at
He seems really friendly and I’m interested in being friends with him
Have you guys ever had any friendships with your barista
 Share some stories of how you became friends with them :)
my sister once called me and had me pretend to be santa for kids
my sister is a teacher, but while she was getting her degree she worked at the local boys and girls club
now the fact that our teeny town even had one was a miracle, but it was good because the kids had a good place to stay while their parents were working, as well as had adults who were personally invested in them, which is something that couldn’t be said about their home lives.
many of the kids had very bad parental figures who would treat them like a burden or just give in and be a yes-man and wouldnt discipline bad behaviors
my sister once had to distract a kid while her mom was getting arrested in the parking lot because she pulled up and was trying to pick up her kid while absolutely hammered, and my sister wouldn’t let her drive home with the kid while drunk.
because of their rough starts, my sister is well-versed on how to care for problem children
even when she put her foot down and had to be the bad guy and punish them sometimes, all her kids loved her because she provided structure
she knew just what to do to get them to behave.
one time, in the middle of fall, i’m riding passenger while my husband was driving, and my phone starts ringing
it was connected to the car, so when i picked up we could both hear
(conversation isn’t verbatim because it was about 2 years ago, but the quotes are the gist of what was said)
she says “hi there mrs
claus, i have some very bad children who need to go on the naughty list, and some good kids who can go on the nice list
can you pass the word to santa
”
my husband puts on a deep voice and says that he could tell that she needed to speak to him, and asks her to give him the names
she starts listing off who will go on the nice list, and eventually reaches the kids who had good hearts but were acting up that day.
“what about you timmy, you’re a good kid but you haven’t been very nice today
if i tell him to put you on the nice list, do you promise to be nicer to everyone
”
“yes miss
 i promise
”
“okay, timmy can go on the nice list too
he knows that he’s been bad but he’ll be better from now on
what about you jimmy, should you go on the naughty or nice list
”
“nice miss
”
Redditors who have a multi-Cat home...
Tell me a little bit about how you cats interact with each other
Do they play and eat together
 Do they like each other, ignore each other or hate each other
 Give us an example or two of their interactions.
Anyone who went through adult braces, how did you build confidence

Hi there, I'm 27F and got my braces 8 months ago
I work in tech and interviewing for a lead position next week, the role may probably require building a small team
I'm concerned that because I need to be in a lead position, braces is something that can go against me, cos I look like a teenager (Asian genes)
I'm low on confidence just thinking that and that the hiring manager may not feel I'm apt at leading people
I told myself that I have all the skills I need technically, and just need to build more on the leadership skills, but one part of me tells me to be realistic that braces can go against me while interviewing
No one wants to hire a lead who looks like a teenager.
How my husband and I fail at being adults...
We're in our mid-thirties
We just bought a house
Last night while shopping, we looked at maybe getting some new bath towels, since ours are definitely in need of replacing and the ones in the shop were on offer
We talked about for a bit..
whether we really wanted to spend £15 - £20 now or whether we should wait a bit
Decided to leave it for now...
and moved further down the aisle.
...
literally 2 minutes later we decided to get two Pokémon plush toys for £18 without giving it a second thought.
I feel we really don't have our priorities straight as adults
(And to clarify: The Pokémon plush toys are for us)
I finally have the date for my first appointment at Tavistock and Portman child gender clinic, after two years of waiting

Hey friends
 I'm a 17 year old trans man in the UK
 For a little background, I've been questioning since puberty, officially came out at 14/15, and have been on what felt like an endless waiting list since the 27th of October 2017 when I was initally referred
But, FINALLY, progress is happening, and after a little over 2 years of waiting, I'm on the first step of the ladder to my medical transition, and I'm very eager to chat about it

I've also completed almost every available step regarding social transition in the UK - so I've got a legal name change, gender marker change on my passport, live socially as a male as much as I can (and as a camp one at that
), all my IDs and whatnot are in the correct name, etc etc
I feel as ready as I'll ever be to start pursuing medical transition

So, lets talk about this
 Ask anything you want (within reason of course) about transitioning in the UK, transition as a young person, what my journey in particular has been like, how this has felt for me, or any questions about female-to-male transition
 I love wittering on about this, so no question is "too stupid" or "too small" to ask

Why does my boss treat a particular coworker better than the rest of us

A little background: I am a Ph.D
student and work in a lab with about 10 other people
There's this one guy in particular I cannot begin to understand
He walks around the lab all day and points out stuff that needs to be cleaned, repaired, whatever
If you are doing a reaction and dirty something he comes to you and demands you clean it immeditely
He also  frequently asks us what we are doing and as of late he has been telling us that what we are doing was "his idea" and that he wanted to do it but hasn't found the time yet
Now he is demanding that he go on all the papers we write as a lead author because he "originally had the idea and we stole it from him"
The kicker is, I have never seen this guy ever do actual work in the lab
When he presents his research in our group meetings he has basically no results
However, my boss praises this guy and goes to him all the time for advice/etc
They also often drink beer together
My boss also agrees that this guy go on certain papers as a lead author because although he didn't do any of the work he did "have the idea first"
Please, can someone explain this to me
 Why does my boss like this guy so much and treat the rest of us like trash and not respect our intellectual property

How do you girls do anything at all with long nails

I've mostly kept my nails short, cutting them every week, ever since I was a small child
My mom did not believe in long nails so she made me cut them weekly
The habit stuck
I am also a musician (piano since age 6, violin since age 8) and my teachers always told me to cut my nails
Recently, I decided to grow out my nails really long just for fun, for the first time in my life (and bought some pretty sweet nail polish too, to go with my nice long nails).
While the nail polish looks really pretty on a longer nail as opposed to my usual trimmed nails, it has been SUCH AN INCONVENIENCE doing daily tasks
I was trying to help my 3 year old cousin build his railroad tracks toy set today and he could do it better than me
I couldn't build anything properly cos my nails prevented me from gripping them.
I have also tried to play the piano with long nails
I am used to playing on it with trimmed nails, but now I understand why my teacher always emphasized the importance of a musician having short nails
I couldn't play shit
It's so hard to press the keys and I made so many mistakes which I do not usually make.
Also, I keep accidentally scratching myself and the people around me
I think I accidentally scratched my crush's arm but he was being nice about it and did not say anything.
Right now as I am typing this on my phone, I have already made so many typos
My accuracy of typing has gone down.
How do y'all function with long nails

 This is torture and I am chopping them off tomorrow
:( Isn't there another way to feel more feminine with my nails

Celebrating my doggo 🐶
Just wanted to post about my beloved doggo who has been with my family for ..
almost 18 years
 (We don’t know when her exact birthday was)
She’s a real gem
 Caught mice during her peak (yes mice, somehow it went into her kennel), was never jealous of other doggos , always kind and understanding to other doggos and is still an amazing doggo.
Redditors if you have time to spare please wish her well

 She’s still very much alive (though slower and not doing so good visually) I hope she lives out her life happily and pain free.
Thanks for reading and have a good day/night

 😁
I need advice
Hey , Im 15 , in hs
I can talk with people and used to make friends really easily, but nowadays I cant finish a sentence properly , I feel like Im talking nonsense
I know  that , what im doing and saying is wrong , how can I fix

My smelling sense is extremely developed, at least this is what people say.
I can smell anything
I can smell if tea/water has sugar/salt in it
I can say if beans are cooked or soup has enough water in it just by it's smell, even from outside of kitchen
I can say who is in the room without seeing them if I know them
I can say if someone opened door of  the fridge in the last 5-10 minutes
And other stuff like that.
This thing started about 7-8 months ago
I don't know how or why
But I'm starting to like it lol.
I'm a bodyguard and I don't really..
mind
Well, not a bodyguard in a literal sense
My friends told me that I feel like their bodyguard since I'm always walking behind them and I usually give way to them whenever we're walking to places and all
I'm not sure why, but it feels assuring to see all of them like: in front of me
And it's not even like—three people can't walk side-by-side together so I'm left behind—even if it's a single friend I end up behind them.
Maybe it's out of courtesy or some sort of insecurity that I don't want them to see my back profile
; Regardless it made me chuckle and I don't mind being a ‘bodyguard’
Does anyone else have a habit like this

Do you have an interest that really brings you joy

So my first year of college was really rough
I was a music major but I left the program because my mental health was going down the toilet and music stopped being my safe place for a while
I kind of lost who I was after that year, and I feel like this might be stupid, but getting into kpop brought joy back into my life
It can be exhausting sometimes because there's so much content and so many artists, but I've been having the most fun I've had since high school
I feel like a kid again and I'm not old, but you know what I mean
 Does anyone else have a similar story

I'm in a good mooooooood
After weeks of feeling either numb or completely miserable, I woke up feeling great today
 I had breakfast, got some work done and even went for a walk
It may not be much, but I'm still happy and proud :)
It's my 27th birthday and I'm 299 days sober

It's my 27th birthday
 Which also marks 299 days sober for me (by far, the longest I have been sober since I was 13
Finally beating my addictions)
Despite some pretty unfortunate events in recent days, I've had a few major wins recently that I'm really excited about, that I could never have accomplished while still a drunk trainwreck.
I was working a temporary position for a major corporation for the past few months and after hours of interviews, I landed a permanent role that I'm just loving &amp; that will change my life with huge benefits (a paid month of vacation every year being one of those benefits

)
I'm just so happy to still be here and able to say I'm finally becoming a person I can be proud of
I'm really excited for the future in a way I haven't been for many, many years.
Happy weekend, all

What is your opinion on astrological signs

I've always thought they were completely bogus
My friends would always tease me about being a emotionally weak puzzle piece, or whatever they're called
Same goes for my friend, a a scorpion
She thinks that she's scary and dangerous because she's one
Like dude, why does the way the stars align actually matter
I couldn't care less if you were a gymnast or a candy corn
Do people actually seriously believe in this stuff

Any gamers in here

I'll most likely be doing the majority of my holiday shopping online
My fiance would like a new ps headset with attached mic
 Any playstation gamers in here that use gaming headsets
 I want to get my fiance a new one for xmas and am looking on recommendations as well as looking at reviews online
 Looking to spend between 25-50 dollars
Thx
Your thoughts on Crocs

What are your thoughts on Crocs
 I know that they're polarizing, but they haven't died yet
So, what do you think

I’ve been reading books that my son gets assigned in school, and it’s such a cool thing to share with him.
He loved to read as a little kid
I remember reading to him as well - from Where the Wild Things Are to Junie B Jones to Diary of a Wimpy Kid to Harry Potter
He got away from it for a while, by now has assigned reading as a ninth grader
We talk about what’s happening, and get excited for the other to catch up
It started with To Kill a Mockingbird, a book I’ve always loved and hadn’t revisited
I’m almost done with A Thousand Splendid Suns, and we’ll be reading Pride and Prejudice in the spring
I really recommend doing this as a parent
It’s a good way to reach into their lives a bit.
I watched The Matrix for the first time last night
With my mom and little sister
My mom made some funny commentary during some of the fight scenes
"We get it
It's a man's movie
Get to the dialogue now." Just made me laugh and it wasn't half bad
We decided we would both have taken the blue pill, but I said I would have done red out of curiosity
Crazy to think that I was 7 years old when that movie came out, I've always seen the memes, but have only just watched it.
Here are my favorite ice breakers and why I like using them
What are yours and why

When getting to know people I enjoy asking questions that can get them really talking about themselves
Most people don’t really feel comfortable outright describing themselves, especially without context, so I think asking the right questions helps a lot.
The main one I go to is: If you had one superpower, what would it be
 A classic, and simple
Also a little bit silly
That’s why I like it
 Anybody can answer it, and you get a lot of insight about them too
Once had somebody tell me mind control would be their choice so now I know to avoid them because they’re a damn supervillain.
Next, simpler: Do you enjoy coffee
 Now, most people do
I drink a decent amount of coffee, and enjoy visiting different shops
Buuuuuuuuuut
 I know nothing about it
Can’t tell you what makes different coffees better than others or brewing methods or anything
All I know if that the hot(or iced) bean juice makes me FOCUSED
This question usually opens people up to talk about those things, and if not and they just like coffee, it gives me a good idea for places to hang out with them

Next question: This one is a little bit more fluid in terms of how exactly to phrase the question, but I like to ask about music
Usually, this can be tough, for some reason a lot of people struggle to identify a solid favorite or something they really love
Maybe part of it is fear of being judged since music is so subjective
 Maybe it’s because there is SO MUCH MUSIC that it’s hard to narrow it down
 Probably a bit of both
Anyway, to try to circumvent this issue, I’ll say something like, “Without thinking what is the first song/band/album that comes to mind
” Because it kind of taps into the subconscious and from there you can pick at it and find out why that is so deeply engrained in their brain
 Fun stuff
 lol
Anyway, this is getting kind of long
Will share more if anyone engages me here
 Share with me your favorites and why you love them
 Also, let’s take this chance to get to know each other

Advice for playing videogames
I'm lying in my bed, tired due to school
And I'm just thinking that I haven't played too much the last months because I moved to a new house with my mother and brother
Before that I used to play every day but it got at the point where I didn't enjoy it as when I was a kid, now I'm 22yo
I want to play again but every time I open a game I feel overwhelmed by the complex and find I'm gonna need for it
Should I look for a partner to play with
 Or should I wait longer to have more desire

Looking for a film from when I was very young.
Hello everyone reading this
I won't waste your time and I'm gonna get straight to the point.
When i was around four years old, my Grandma took me to see a movie
I remember loving the movie and constantly drawing pictures of the characters but I can't remember the name
I remember it probably being a studio ghibli film and I was around four years told
(It was probably made in 2010)
The story was about some fairy-type people being forced out of their home in a hole in the wall in someone's house
After they're out they begin to make friends with someone in the house, and that's about all I remember.
I hope you can help, I just really wanna find that movie from my childhood and continue to enjoy it.
I finally accomplished some pretty monumental goals I set for myself years ago..
now what

I'm 19 now, and for the first 18 years of my life I was a depressed, ego-driven, porn-addicted incel maniac
A while back I decided I wanted to be better and stop feeling like trash all the time
So I set myself 2 big goals - 1) Get healthy and deal with my mental illness and 2) Get a girlfriend
Well, after months of eating healthy, reading, making progress, relapsing into old habits, taking psychedelics and confronting my issues, I've reached both these goals
I no longer lay around all day depressed, I'm in fantastic health,  I met an amazing girl and am beginning to realise more and more how I can fill that gaping chasm of meaninglessness that has so far defined my life.
For the first time in my life I'm finding myself at the top of a mountain I've never climbed before, I find it strange how my first thought is "now what
"
I have a dream and I know you do too.
What is your dream

Another weekend passed by here and tomorrow work starts again; but I’m working on making a dream of mine come true soon
It’s not about that one business or something that is the dream I'm chasing, it’s the life that I could be having without a daily job that makes me feel like a prisoner
I know personal businesses are not easier and in fact it is harder and could be more restraining, but there will be a bigger purpose to it, and I will be able to control my time and see my family more.
It’s hard to continue working on something that doesn’t have direct results right now, so I want someone to actually be interested in keeping up with what I'm doing and
As well be interested in listening to what you have
So tell me, what is your dream
 What is it that when you think about it it puts a smile on your face

do you guys have that one friend that always makes you smile even during harsh days

this week has been kinda stressful for me due to bad grades, but I still end up smiling or laughing at least once a day because of my pal
first off, just wanna say that last year he kinda intimidated me for the sole reason that he's a huge dude into heavy metal, so I was kinda afraid to say the wrong thing around him because I wasn't in a good place yet; however, around the end of the school year, I started being more open and I interacted with him more
this year has started well since we talk even more and he always says something silly that makes me chuckle even during not so good times, but we also have moments where we actually have a conversation
the last one we had made us talk about instruments and he said I should play the ukulele so i plan on buying one on Christmas and learn how to play it
I hope this whole thing doesn't sound odd but having friends is still a kind of weird concept to me in a way due to unfortunate past events, but I'm in a better place now
I hope you guys also have that one buddy that makes you go ':)'
I’m half a year sober today
Today marks my half a year, and I’m miserable
My body aches and I want to relapse so bad
I know I can’t because it hurts everyone around me
I went sober for my mom, not for myself
My  mother has nothing good going for her, and I love her more than life itself, so that’s why I’m doing this
I love you mom, more than I love drugs
Thank you for making me a better person Everyone says they’re so proud of me, and that I’ve come through so much and done this for myself
This isn’t for me, I wanna yell at them how much of a hell it is
I want to go back so bad
But I do it for Mama
:)
I lived out my childhood dream of using a chainsaw today

Growing up my grandpa was always using a chainsaw for something it seemed, he just always had one going
 I used to sit and watch him in awe of how cool he looked
 He may have only been 5’4”, but to me he looked like the biggest badass on the planet.
He always told me when I was big enough he would tech me how to use his chainsaw, but unfortunately that never happened
 Shortly after my grandma passed away he broke his decades long sobriety and started abusing his painkillers
 Not long after he ended up a hemorrhage in his brain and died only a few days after my 13th birthday.
I’m not religious, and I don’t believe in heaven or hell
 I do believe that if he was still alive today he would have been so proud of me though, and that’s enough for me
 I was cutting down trees and blanches like I had been using a chainsaw for my whole life
 I’ve been grinning from ear to ear all day thinking that maybe I looked as cool as my grandpa did all those years ago.
And even though my arms feel like I’ve been jerking off for the past six hours, I can’t wait to do it again

Should I get the destiny 2 dlc or should I get keys for CSGO

Hey guys, so I was on steam today and I saw lots of good games for me to play and I really wanted to get some of them for Jesus’es birthday(Christmas if you didn’t know) then I saw destiny 2 dlc and I really wanted to get that because of how much fun it looks, but I then saw csgo keys for cheap on the market and I really love the skins you get for guns so I’m in a bit of a clash of thought, mind helping me out

Targeted ads make me feel uncomfortable
I don't know what it is these days but it just feels like everything that i do on the internet is being recorded
It feels like they know every move i make and i'm just not comfortable with it.
I recently watched one F1 video on youtube and immediately i'm flooded with advertisements about F1.
Today i was scrolling Amazon for a bluetooth receiver and a couple hours later i was on instagram and i get TWO advertisements about the EXACT product i was looking at.
I just think this is some dystopian shit and i am uncomfortable as hell and don't know what to do
Does anyone else feel like this is an intrusion of my privacy and that this shouldn't be allowed
 I was wondering if any other people feel the same way as me....
I celebrated my birthday as the real me for the fourth time today

I came out four and a bit years ago, so this is the first time I get to enjoy my birthday as myself
It's great

I love how each year it just feels more and more natural that of course I'm wearing a skirt and a hairbow and a statement necklace to my birthday party
Like, what else would I wear

My parents don't accept me yet, but I got a little kick when I buzzed in at their apartment complex and they were forced to say "yes" when the guard called and asked if they were expecting a "Miss Liliana".
:D
How about you
 What was your last birthday like, and is there anything that gave you a random bit of joy recently

Have an amazing day
 Pass it on

Stop, look up, wherever you are, just look up
You may be at your house, school, on a line at the store but wherever you are look for the closest person
It can be anybody, but just make them feel loved and appreciated
Nobody is near
 Message a friend
You have no friends
 DM me and i'll be yours
 Now don't let this one act of kindness be your only one
 When you see a kid online posting about his first fortnite win, don't comment hatefully
Just ignore it, don't make that happy kids day worse
If you see a smartass or asshole on reddit, just downvote and keep scrolling
Sometimes people have bad days
Now keep scrolling and have a good day

My grandparents are moving into a nursing home.
My grandparents are moving into an assisted living facility soon
I’m taking it kind of hard
They have never felt “old” to me until now
They’ve always lived in their own home and are very active for their age (87 and 89)
But recently my grandfather has been having balance issues and the family thinks it’s best for them.
I’m sure it’s true that they will have a good time at this place, but damn
It’s like suddenly hitting me that they are actually really old and might not be around forever.
I Got A 30% Raise
 I am Worth It

I got a raise
 It is for $5 more an hour than I was previously earning
That's about a 30% increase

Eight months ago I accepted the job at a lower rate because I knew nothing about the software they used which was QuickBook
Plus, I had no financial experience
I only got the job because my friend who worked the position before me, promised to train me for free for a week and a half to make sure I knew how to handle everything.
Roughly 4 weeks ago, my company hired a new person
I overheard she was getting $4 more an hour than me
Now, I was kinda pissed
I've been putting a lot into my job and this new person walks into our department getting a solid salary, meanwhile, I've been working my tail off of for a lower rate.
Plus this new person lied on their resume
Said they knew QuickBooks, when they clearly did not know it.
So, that got me wanting to take action
At the same time I'd been thinking about my pay for months before all this
For the first four months of my job I felt like they would fire me or something, turns out I'm really good at my job and I learned a lot of internal codes really quickly.
Then, last week this new employee got let go
the next morning I pulled my boss aside and politely told her I was thinking about my current pay
Before I could say anything else, she tells me, "I have been too
" Turns out it's been on her mind for a long time as well.
We talked a little before she asked me how much I'd like
I told her $8 more an our than what I currently make
In reality $4 more per hour is what I needed
I figured I'd ask for more and be happy with whatever they would give me.
My boss told me she agreed and is going try to get me that when she talks to Human Resources and the CEO
Over the next week her &amp; I continuously talked about expectations and how to approach the CEO
The plan was to ask for $8 more and settle for $4 more an hour to "meet in the middle."
My boss was fantastic and got me $5 more an hour
 I'm super excited.
Never sell yourself short
Ask for what you are worth and then some
The worst thing a company can do is tell you 'no,' and you start looking for a better gig or keep working there.
How do you put off weight

I was thinking, I started to notice that I'm a little overweight, I'm 176 cm and 85 kg
More than that, my friends and family started to notice this too and it's bothering me
I'm thinking of rescheduling my whole week, so I would wake up at 7 am, go for a hour long jogging session, then go home and work out, go to college and then go to bed at 11 pm
I also want to stop eating at all after 7 pm and just drink water whenever I feel hungry
How do you deal with weight if you currently have the similar problem, or, if you have already solved it, what did you do

Just had an awesome Friendsgiving with all my best friends and I feel warm and satisfied
I just got done cleaning up from a Friendsgiving I had with my suite-mates, and it was just so much fun
 All it really was was just sitting, drinking, talking, laughing, eating a DELICIOUS turkey,and being able to go to bed and just sit in that warm, cozy feeling of family and friendship
I’m kind of just throwing a bunch of words together cause I’m really tired rn, but I wanted to share cause I really enjoyed tonight.
DAE hate Saturday nights because after the next night it's back to school

It's hard to enjoy Saturday night because I get anxiety thinking about once it's daytime, the next night is Sunday night and the weekend will be over.
Been seeing her name all day
I’ve been seeing my ex girlfriends name all day
Her nickname, the flower, and some other posts that mention her name through out  today
We’ve been separated for a while and haven’t spoke
Anyone have any idea if it’s just a coincidence or something else 

I just walked barefoot down the stairs for a hungover pint of water only for my toes to be graced by my doggo Barney's suspect package straight from the booty
I hope everyone else's morning is just as fabulous :)
I even put out my joint to enjoy it when I got back up with water, feeling extra inspired and shit, still half pissed watching some Alan Watts talking about the universe, I guess this is my star dust..
thank you universe, I hear you x
Saying goodbye to comfort to get what you want

I have a cozy job, make enough to chill and spend money on a dumb thing or thing
I'm in my mid 20's
I get to smoke the green when I want everything is fine but I'm not happy
I want to progress more in life and in myself
This has been me for the past 5 years and I need to change to achieve who I wish to be.
First step is saying goodbye to my ganja friend
Lots of great memories, comfort, and chilling
To get the jobs I want, I need to test negative
Maybe in the future I'll be back but for now I have to get a future first.
Sorry for the late night lame vibes
 I don't really have anyone to tell.
I caught my dad today

I was helping him with housework when I noticed him on the top rung of an old ladder
So I stuck around just in case
That’s when he fell and I was in the perfect position
I consider this an absolute win considering I’m not a big dude, 5’9 140lbs, and my dad weighs about 20lbs heavier than me
 I know, I know I’m cool thanks :)
After brushing my teeth I remembered that my orthodontist office has the best thing that I never appreciated.
So I have really bad teeth, I’ll get braces soon
My orthodontist office has a lobby kinda waiting area (like offices do) but there are gaming consoles there
Not just any gaming consoles though, there are bigass boxes that you’d find in an arcade
They are attached to the wall at face height and have two controllers on both boxes (there are two)
Now this all sounds mildly interesting, so what
 BUT NO each box only allows one game
And the two games that can be played are CRASH BANDICOOT and A SHREK GAME, I didn’t even know such a game existed
 A 3D Shrek game where you can play different characters and it’s played with the two attached controllers (Play Station controllers attached to these old ads boxes mind you)
I should appreciate these gaming boxes existences when I go next time
(I would put this on r/mildlyinteresting but, I want to talk about this RIGHT NOW and I need a photo to post there.
Am I the only person having songs playing in her head 95% of the time with no way of silencing it

Sometimes you hear a song on the radio, in a commercial or whatever, and the song gets stuck in your head for a while, then fades and you move on.
Not me.The song sticks.I can have a random song, where I don’t even know the lyrics, stuck for an hour, only to be replaced by another one.
There is almost ALWAYS a song playing in my head and most of the time, I don’t get to choose it.
Sometimes it’s a song I heard on tv, sometimes it’s a song I really like, sometimes it’s an old song I haven’t heard in years and sometimes it’s an old commercial music from 20/30 years ago.
I don’t get to choose and I can not get rid of it.Only way is to try to replace it with something else.
I found  for instance “Space Oddity” by David Bowie is good to force replace whatever horrible song is playing at one point
It’s not working 100% and sometimes the original annoying song comes back but it’s something.“Comfortably Numb” by Pink Floyd can also be effective.
I feel socially good like really good
I’ve always been a loner not because I wanted to to but I because I was loser in general I was bullied constantly and after that I would never approach people or start conversations the only way I made the few friends I had was because they spoke first this wasn’t really a problem until high school freshman year where I was sitting alone eating like I usually do then I realized something watching some girls talk in a group that I’m friend less I never hung out with people because no one offered me but this junior year I was invited to hangout by multiple friends
 I feel so good it’s like I’m finally out of this hole of inactivity and self hatred and just talking to people but I still have a way to go like all 5 of my close friends actively seek out friends to hangout with and if they want to talk to someone they just hit them up but I’ll make it there
There is no better line in a movie than "You met me at a very strange time in my life".
Project mayhem
Think about it
I loved that entire movie
The actors, the dialogue
Really, there wasn't a part that wasn't perfect
And as always Helen delivered an awesome performance
I wish that I could
Thugs don't get that
Heh.
I didn’t think it would happen but my 98 y/o great grandma (watches the office) now understands why Michael Scott says “what’s what she said” and uses it all the time now
 LOL
Can’t sleep
Thought I’d mention something funny as hell thats been happening around her home
 I arrive and her main nurse Rob says “that’s what she said” and I’m all “huh
 What
”, “ I told her what it means and now it’s all I hear haha
Good luck”
I show up to her room and as she usually is, she’s watching TV
 Not The Office, she was finishing up Family Feud
I usually bring her jolly ranchers since she says “only geezers eat that old folk werthers shit”
 I go “I’m going to stick it in here real quick before anyone sees...”
Next thing I hear,  “That’s what she said


” And she starts laughing her ass off
I laughed too.
Later a phlebotomist comes in to take some blood as per usual
She’s new and doesn’t know gran very well
 She says “don’t worry it’ll be quick”, gran glances at me with a smile on her face and bam
 “That’s what she said
”   🤣🤣🤣
She kind of knows the context of how to use the joke but sometimes not but she laughs so hard anyway.
Watching tv I say “want me to put something else on
”  A 4 second pause then “that’s what she said
”
A little later we roll out to the “shit and bitch” room aka the rec area where a lot of old people are
She overheard an old guy yelling at his nurse about an IV
He says to her about the IV “oh shit, did you pull it out (referring to the needle) and gran leans back and says “THATS WHAT SHE SAID

”
Rob, her and I start laughing while everyone else looks confused.
I can’t wait to see what new phrase she starts to abuse lol
Wherever you are, Have a good day or night
Hardly anyone believes me, but I'm up every day at 5am for 18+mos to work on this
I am 36 and about two years ago I had a "life crisis." I have a "good job" and a family I support
I guess the reality of "hey congrats, you got 30 years of this
" got to me, combined with starting a new job that made me realize that 1) this job was probably about as good as it gets and 2) it still sucks monkey balls.
The one way I can describe how I feel/felt was I was listening to a podcast in traffic (2+ hours at least a day) and this one guy was being interviewed about how sucky life is and he said "adult life is the ultimate voluntary prison" or something like that
There is no way I would be commuting out to the suburbs except so that my kids could have a large yard (and they love it
).
So, I started coming into work at 6am and getting the ability to leave early
I started working on a game to get my mind off of how life sucks
Its been 18 months and other than a few people at work that seemed to note I was always there first, no one thinks I am there at 6 (they think it's 7:40 or something like that)
 I told a neighbor and people don't seem to believe me, so I stopped telling people
I'd say for the past 6 months, I've been more or less quiet in my real life about this.
And here it is, voila, still 6-8 months away from being done
I hired contract art to replace my art, but about 60% of the art is still mine:
https://imgur.com/l5vo9Hh
A better way to see its progress is to see how it looked in June 2018:
https://imgur.com/zlru7Wh
When I started, I did not start from scratch
I had been working on a little game and this is what it was in 2016:
