The higher the standing the lower the fall.
The nearer the bone the sweeter the meat.
The child is the father of the man
The best is the enemy of the good
The wife is the key of the house.
The more the merrier 
The better the day, the better the deed.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating.
The persuasion of the fortunate sways the doubtful.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.
Fear not the loss of the bell more than the loss of the
The knowledge of the disease is half the cure.
The more the merrier; the fewer the better cheer.
The fat is in the fire 
The Devil is in the details 
In the forehead and the eye, The picture of the mind doth lie.
It is the nature of the beast.
The singer not the song
The nearer the church the farther from God.
To the victor go the spoils
The whole is greater than the sum of the parts
The taste of the kitchen is better than the smell.
Child is the father of the man
Best is the enemy of the good
The end justifies the means
The Devil take the hindmost 
The bigger, the better
Speech is the picture of the mind.
Wit is the lightning of the mind.
The ladle cools the pot.
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder 
Proof of the pudding is in the eating
Out of the frying-pan into the fire.
The chamber of sickness is the chapel of devotion.
The boy is father to the man
The hand that rocks the cradle rules the world
The full stomach loatheth the honeycomb, but to the
Take the will for the deed.
In the kingdom of the blind the one eyed man is king
The female of the species is more deadly than the male
The best lie is the worst.
The tempter is the greater rogue.
The loquacity of fools is a warning to the wise.
When the wind's in the south It's in the rain's mouth.
April and May are the keys of the year.
Tell the truth and shame the Devil 
Speak the truth and shame the devil.
Spare the rod and spoil the child 
The cock crows and the hen goes.
The sharper the blast, The shorter 'twill last.
Of all the crafts honesty is the master-craft.
Let the weakest go to the wall.
It's the singer not the song
The more noble the more humble.
The exception which proves the rule 
The grass is always greener on the other side of the fence 
The back is made for the burden.
Let the dead bury the dead
Let the punishment fit the crime
The early bird catches the worm
The pot calls the kettle black.
The foremost dog catches the hare.
Don't let the cat out of the bag 
It is the clerk makes the justice.
When the wind's in the south The bait goes in their mouth.
The husband is always the last to know
When the wind's in the west The fish will bite best.
When the wind's in the east The fish will bite least.
To know the disease is half the cure.
When the wind's in the south, It blows the bait into the fishes' mouth.
Follow the river and you'll get to the sea.
Happy is the bride the sun shines on, And the corpse the rain rains on.
Wine is the master's, but the goodness is the drawer's.
Forsake not the market for the toll.
Doubt is the beginning not the end of wisdom
In the deepest water is the best fishing.
To take the wrong sow by the ear.
As good to be out of the world as out of the fashion.
The first blow is half the battle.
Whole is greater than the sum of the parts
The bottom line is the bottom line
When the head aches, all the body is the worse.
The squeaky wheel that gets the grease
The subjects' love is the king's lifeguard.
As the Friday, so the Sunday, As the Sunday, so the week.
The worth of a thing is best known by the want of it.
The greatest burdens are not the gainfullest.
A chip of the old block.
God tempers the wind to the shorn sheep.
Set the saddle on the right horse.
One eye of the master sees more than four of the
Hold with the hare and run with the hounds
In every country the sun riseth in the morning.
The receiver is as bad as the thief.
In the husband wisdom, in the wife gentleness.
The more things change, the more they stay the same
Look to the cow, and the sow, and the wheat mow, and all will
The Devil has all the best tunes 
The tongue talks at the head's cost.
A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
The best fish are near the bottom.
The cat sees not the mouse ever.
The stillest humours are always the worst.
The worst spoke in the cart-wheel breaks first.
More the merrier
The devil's children have the devil's luck.
Merry is the feast-making until we come to the
The merry month of May.
Speak well of the dead.
Catch not at the shadow and lose the substance.
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.
Better pay the butcher than the doctor.
Beware the Ides of March 
Don't put the cart before the horse 
Bird in the hand is worth two in the bush
It is the early bird catches the worm.
The hindermost dog may catch the hare.
The young suckers drain the old tree.
All's for the best in the best of all possible worlds
While the grass grows the steed starves.
The cobbler always wears the worst shoes 
The greater truth, the greater libel.
The master's eye makes the horse fat.
Take care of the pennies and the pounds will take care of themselves 
The finest shoe often hurts the foot.
Silks and satins put out the fire in the kitchen.
Take care of the pence, and the pounds will take care of
The sweetest wine makes the sharpest vinegar.
Temper the tongue.
Reserve the master-blow.
Welcome is the best dish on the table.
As the twig is bent the tree's inclined.
One law for the rich and another for the poor
The clock goes as it pleases the clerk.
Female of the species is more deadly than the male
Steal the goose, and give the giblets in alms.
The law is not the same at morning and night.
One beats the bush and another catcheth the bird.
The lame goeth as far as the staggerer.
The topmost branch is not the safest perch.
Hold not with the hounds and run with the hare.
Change of fortune is the lot of life.
The empty can that makes the most noise
To cast oil in the fire is not the way to quench it.
Better that the feet slip than the tongue.
Fat is in the fire
Where are the crumbs there are the chickens.
He had enough to keep the wolf from the door.
God healeth, and the physician hath the thanks.
Devil is in the details
The darkest hour is just before the dawn 
From the sublime to the ridiculous is only one step
Hand that rocks the cradle rules the world
Procrastination is the thief of time.
He who pays the piper calls the tune
Business is the salt of life.
It's the early bird that catches the worm 
The English are a nation of shopkeepers 
It's the squeaky wheel that gets the grease
Variety is the spice of life
Many kiss the child for the nurse's sake.
Trade is the mother of money.
The age of miracles is past
The wages of sin is death 
England is the Paradise of women.
Poverty is the mother of health.
Experience is the mistress of fools.
Necessity is the mother of invention.
Nip it in the bud.
Love is the touchstone of virtue.
Sloth is the mother of poverty.
That which is bred in the bone will never be out of the
Ingratitude is the daughter of pride.
Don't throw the baby out with the bathwater 
Idleness is the key of beggary.
Brevity is the soul of wit.
Modesty is the handmaid of virtue.
Be not the first by whom the new is tried, Be not the last to cast the old aside.
When the cat winketh, little wots the mouse what the cat
A man must sell his ware at the rate of the market.
After a famine in the stall, Comes a famine in the hall.
Make the best of a bad bargain.
It's useless saving at the spigot and spending at the
In the old of the moon, A cloudy morning bodes a fair afternoon.
Grass is always greener on the other side of the fence
There is a tide in the affairs of man which, taken at the
A word is enough to the wise.
A word to the wise is enough
The moon's not seen where the sun shines.
The apple never falls far from the tree 
According to the old proverb.
The greatest talkers are always the least doers.
When the cat's away the mice will play
Look to the main chance.
The best is cheapest.
It is better to spare at the brim than the bottom.
Thou art a bitter bird, said the raven to the
Flowers are the pledge of fruit.
Pains are the wages of ill-pleasures.
Talk of the devil and his imp appears.
Let the best dog leap the stile first.
What the heart thinketh, the tongue speaketh.
A woman's place is in the home 
In the midst of life we are in death
The wearer best knows where the shoe pinches.
Use the means, and God will give the blessing.
The least boy always carries the greatest fiddle.
Love of money is the root of all evil 
Though the fox runs the chicken hath wings.
You can't hold with the hare and run with the hounds 
Silence is the best ornament of a woman.
You can't run with the hare and hunt with the hounds
It's not the gay coat that makes the gentleman.
A dry cough is the trumpeter of death.
The lower millstone grinds as well as the upper.
It is the last straw that breaks the camel's back.
He that hath shipped the devil must make the best of him.
Such as the tree is, such is the fruit.
The labourer is worthy of his hire
For want of a nail the shoe was lost; for want of a shoe the horse was lost; and for want of a horse the man was lost
If you can't stand the heat get out of the kitchen 
Of two evils choose the lesser.
Boy is father to the man
It's the empty can that makes the most noise
Let not the fiddler play the fife, Nor fifer play the fiddle.
If the grass grow in Janiveer, It grows the worse for't all the year.
On the sea sail; on the land settle.
What's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
When the clouds are on the hills, They'll come down by the mills.
The mill cannot grind with the water that is past.
Never speak ill of the dead
Talk of the devil and he'll be sure to appear.
Word to the wise is enough
The abundance of money ruins youth.
The Devil Was Sick, the Devil a Monk Would Be; The Devil Grew Well, the Devil a Monk Was He.
Sloth turneth the edge of wit.
The bigger they are, the harder they fall
Keep from the anger of a great man.
Talk of the Devil, and he is bound to appear 
He that strikes with the sword shall be beaten with the
Every man for himself, and the Devil take the hindmost
Mischiefs come by the pound and go away by the ounce.
Sleep on it; the pillow is the best counsellor.
Few people are out of the reach of slander.
The greatest scholars are not always the wisest men.
As the old cock crows so crows the young.
Trash and trumpery is the highway to beggary.
Children suck the mother when they are young, and the
The greatest crabs are not always the best meat.
Money is the root of all evil 
Idleness is the root of all evil.
The greatest barkers are not always the sorest biters.
As the fool thinks, so the bell chinks.
He must crack the nut that would eat the kernel.
Corn is cleansed with the wind, and the soul with chastening.
The truth will out 
Blessed are the peacemakers 
We never know the worth of water till the well is dry.
Diligence is the mother of good fortune.
September blow soft, Till the fruit's in the loft.
Discretion is the better part of valour
Attack is the best form of defence
Woman's place is in the home
Possession is nine points of the law
Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery 
Debt is the worst kind of poverty.
Disease is oft the tax of pleasure.
The price of liberty is eternal vigilance
The charitable give out at the door, and God puts in at
The worst wheel of a cart creaks most.
When the cat's away, The mice will play.
To a good spender God is the treasurer.
One half of the world knows not how the other half lives.
The tide will fetch away what the ebb brings.
Never leave a friend in the lurch.
To forget a wrong is the best revenge.
It is the part of a wise man to take no notice of many
Where the will is ready, the feet are light.
Riches are but the baggage of fortune.
Spoil not the ship for a penn'orth of tar.
He deserves not the sweet that will not taste the sour.
Little and often fills the purse.
After death the doctor.
It is a sad house where the hen crows louder than the
God help the rich, the poor can beg.
Clothes maketh the man
The good die young
Knaves and fools divide the world.
Children and fools tell the truth
It's all grist to the mill 
Children and fools speak the truth.
Fight the good fight 
The best horse needs breaking, and the best child needs
The opera ain't over till the fat lady sings 
Go the extra mile
End justifies the means
The offender never pardons.
The beggar is never out of his way.
Remove the tale-bearer and contention ceaseth.
Don't rock the boat
Devil take the hindmost
Don't shoot the messenger
Don't upset the apple-cart 
Bigger, the better
Let the buyer beware 
It is the thrift of a spendthrift which ruins him
Opportunity makes the thief.
They that sow the wind, shall reap the whirlwind
Perseverance kills the game.
Curiosity killed the cat
The gown is hers who wears it, and the world is his who
Fortune favours the brave.
He that runs in the night stumbles.
He giveth one knock on the hoop, and another on the barrel.
Do all the good you talk of; but talk not of all the good you
To know where the shoe pinches.
Don't spoil the ship for a ha'porth of tar
Proverbs are the texts of common life.
Old fools are the worst of fools.
It is a great journey to the world's end.
Where the wind is on Candlemas Day There it will stick to the end of May.
Every man is the architect of his fortune.
All the world loves a lover
The vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray still.
Distance lends enchantment to the view
What the eye sees not, the heart rues not.
Losers are always in the wrong.
Best to be on the safe side
Under the furze is hunger and cold. Under the broom is silver and gold.
He who stays in the valley will never get over the hill.
For want of a nail the shoe is lost; for want of a shoe
To fright a hind is not the way to catch her.
Their folly pleads the privilege of wealth.
Better the Devil you know than the Devil you don't
No rest for the wicked 
He that will eat the kernel, must crack the nut.
More things change, the more they stay the same
He who lives by the sword shall die by the sword
Where the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered
The customer is always right 
One half of the world does not know how the other half lives
Husband is always the last to know
Where bad's the best, naught must be the choice.
So we have the chink, we'll bear the stink.
What you lose on the swings you gain on the roundabouts
In wiving and thriving men should take counsel of all the
In the end things will mend.
Better to light a candle than to curse the darkness
Always more fish in the sea
Honesty is the best policy 
An old fool is the worst of fools.
As welcome as the flowers in May.
Laughter is the best medicine
The pitcher does not go so often to the water, but it
Temperance is the best physic.
The fifer don't pay a fiddler.
April is the cruellest month
Wisdom rides upon the ruins of folly.
A burnt child dreads the fire.
Hunger is the finest sauce.
The greatest number is made up of units.
A famine in England begins at the horse-manger.
None knows the weight of another's burden.
Don't stop the plough to catch a mouse.
All is grist that comes to the mill 
A full purse makes the mouth to speak.
To forget wrong is the greatest revenge.
A full purse maketh the mouth to speak.
Look not a gift horse in the mouth.
The nurse's tongue is privileged to talk.
The evil wound is cured, but not the evil name.
When the steed is stolen the stable door shall be shut.
That's where the laugh comes in.
It's an ill battle where the devil carries the colours.
The more women look in their glasses, the less they look
Don't shut the stable door after the horse has bolted 
Home is where the heart is
Tis easy to build castles in the air.
A fox should not be of the jury at a goose trial.
Morning is the time for study.
When the going gets tough, the tough get going
There is sleeping enough in the grave.
Happy is the man that has a hobby.
Hail brings frost in the tail.
The best defence is a good offence
Zeal without knowledge is the sister of folly.
If the partridge had the woodcock's thigh, It would be the best bird that ever did fly.
You needn't lock the stable door when the steed is stolen.
Easy to be wise after the event
Nothing came out of the sack but what was in it.
Nothing comes out of the sack but what was in it.
Give the devil his due.
Take time by the forelock.
It is money makes the mare to go.
Never look a gift horse in the mouth 
Carpe diem (Pluck the day; Seize the day)
Everything is the worse for wearing.
They have need of a besom that sweep the house with a turf.
To look for a needle in a pottle of hay.
If you would enjoy the fruit, pluck not the flower.
The sluggard's guise, Loth to go to bed and loth to rise.
Men hold the reins, but the women tell them which way to
Climb not too high, lest the fall be the greater.
He that hath a head of wax must not walk in the sun.
The way to a man's heart is through his stomach
Once a year butter is in the cow's horn.
A spaniel, a woman, and a walnut tree, The more they're beaten the better they be.
One hand washes the other
No time like the present
A man cannot live by the air.
Puff not against the wind.
What the eye does not see the heart does not grieve for.
Possession is nine points of the law, and they say
The head and feet kept warm, The rest will take no harm.
Youth is wasted on the young
Music helps not the toothache.
No one knows the weight of another's burden.
One must sometimes hold a candle to the devil.
The danger's past, and God's forgotten.
If the mountain won't come to Mohammed, then Mohammed must go to the mountain 
The first dish pleaseth all.
The greatest wealth is contentment with a little.
Feed sparingly, and defy the physician.
The best-laid schemes of mice and men gang aft agley 
He that would the daughter win, Must with the mother first begin.
It is the second blow that makes a fray.
Exception which proves the rule
It's best to be on the safe side
It is as good to be in the dark as without light.
Every light is not the sun.
No use locking the stable door after the horse has bolted
If you would fruit have, You must bring the leaf to the grave.
The best things in life are free
Giving to the poor Increaseth your store.
Nothing new under the sun
No striving against the stream.
Never sound the trumpet of your own praise.
Of all crafts, to be an honest man is the master-craft.
When the wind is in the east, It is neither good for man nor beast.
What the eye doesn't see, the heart doesn't grieve over
Between two stools he comes to the ground.
Money often makes the man.
A friend at court is better than a penny in the purse.
The faulty stands on his guard.
Time assuages the greatest grief.
Have not the cloak to make when it begins to rain.
A man of words and not of deeds, Is like a garden full of weeds.
When the oak is before the ash, then you will only get a splash; when the ash is before the oak, then you may expect a soak
A person is known by the company he keeps
The morning sun never lasts a day.
Good talk saves the food
Don't sweat the small stuff
Old saws speak the truth.
Apple a day keeps the doctor away
There's always more fish in the sea
A pennyworth of mirth is worth a pound of sorrow.
A good name keeps its lustre in the dark.
There but for the grace of God, go I 
Early bird catches the worm
Saith Solomon the wise A good wife's a prize.
Say no ill of the year till it is passed.
The pen is mightier than sword 
It is hard to sail o'er the sea in an egg-shell.
Beggars on horseback will ride to the devil.
Constant dropping wears the stone.
Squeaky wheel gets the grease
The empty leech sucks sore.
There's a medium between painting the face and not washing
Doing nothing is the hardest work.
In the coldest flint there is hot fire.
The balance distinguishes not between gold and lead.
He that gropes in the dark finds that he would not.
Strike while the iron is hot.
It's easy to be wise after the event
Bottom line is the bottom line
Time is the rider that breaks youth.
The mother's breath is always sweet.
An ague in the spring, Is physic for a king.
Content is the true philosopher's stone.
A Scotch mist will wet an Englishman through to the
At twelfth-day the days are lengthened a cock's
The road to hell is paved with good intentions 
The absent are always at fault.
A merry companion on the road is as good as a nag.
There needs a long time to know the world's pulse.
Every one basteth the fat hog, while the lean one burneth.
Open confession is good for the soul.
Between two stools one falls to the ground 
It's no use locking the stable door after the horse has bolted
He would not lend his knife to the devil to stab himself.
The world is his who knows how to wait for it.
He that runs fastest gets the prize.
The Devil looks after his own
Woe to the house where there is no chiding.
Bend the twig while it is young.
The longest journey starts with a single step 
No lock will hold 'Gainst the power of gold.
Do not holloa till you are out of the wood.
It's better to light a candle than curse the darkness 
This world is nothing except it tend to the next.
Out of sight out of mind.
A fish always rots from the head down 
First impressions are the most lasting
To everything there is a season; and a time to every
Music has charms to soothe the savage breast 
When the fox preaches, beware of your geese.
Don't cross the bridge till you come to it
What is a pound of butter amongst a kennel of hounds?
If a man says little he thinks the more.
A bit in the morning is better than nothing all day.
The course of true love never did run smooth 
Fools think themselves wise to the very last.
An apple a day keeps the doctor away 
A little nonsense now and then Is relished by the wisest men.
A cold May and a windy Makes a full barn and a findy.
A time and a place for everything
The cat is hungry when a crust contents her.
The longest liver dies at last.
The Devil makes work for idle hands to do 
In for a penny, in for a pound.
Work expands so as to fill the time available
When the wind's in the north You need not go forth [_to fish_].
There's no time like the present
The fairest rose at last is withered.
Make not the devil blacker than he is.
When the well is dug it is easy enough to pump.
Grass grows not upon the highway.
Parsley seed goes nine times to the Devil
Soft words hurt not the mouth.
If the cock moult before the hen, We shall have weather thick and thin; But if the hen moult before the cock, We shall have weather hard as a block.
Step by step the ladder is climbed.
Wit is folly, unless a wise man hath the keeping of it.
Give a man luck, and throw him into the sea.
Crafty evasions save not the truth.
Feather by feather the goose is plucked.
They laugh the loudest who have least to lose.
Ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure
Person is known by the company he keeps
A bad bush is better than the open field.
Words spoken in an evening the wind carrieth
Idle folk have the least leisure.
A swarm of bees in May is worth a load of hay, But a swarm of bees in July is not worth a fly.
Don't bite the hand that feeds you
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
Never make a mountain of a mole-hill.
To give and keep there is need of wit.
The devil can quote Scripture to suit his purpose.
Needs must when the devil drives 
You would make me believe the moon is made of green
Jack of all trades, and master of none.
An idle brain is the devil's workshop.
Many a one for land, Takes a fool by the hand.
Don't quarrel with the beggar for his bone.
The devil is not always at one door.
Judge not a ship as she lies on the stocks.
When fortune smiles take the advantage.
A pin a day is a groat a year.
A thing of beauty is a joy forever 
There's no washing the blackamore white.
Lightning never strikes twice in the same place
When in Rome, do as the Romans do 
Let the buyer look out for himself.
A crow is never the whiter for washing herself often.
Who preacheth war is the devil's chaplain.
Lose an hour in the morning, and you'll be all day
A pennyworth of ease is worth a penny.
He that hath many irons in the fire, some of them will cool.
Little boats must keep the shore.
All are not hunters that blow the horn.
The leopard does not change his spots 
Empty vessels make the most noise
Where it is weakest there the thread breaketh.
Money makes the world go round
Darkest hour is just before the dawn
Love makes the world go round
Too many cooks spoil the broth.
Idle folk take the most pains.
Lazy folk take the most pains.
He that hires the horse must ride before.
The liberal man deviseth liberal things.
Make hay while the sun shines.
They complain wrongfully of the sea, who twice suffer
He needs must go that the devil drives.
A man may lead a horse to the water, but he cannot make him
The great Homer himself sometimes nods.
Need makes the old wife trot.
Never split timber against the grain.
The bird that can sing and will not sing, must be made to
Laugh and the world laughs with you, weep and you weep alone
Step after step the ladder is ascended.
Hungry men think the cook lazy.
Spare to speak and spare to spend.
Empty vessels make the greatest sound.
When it thunders the thief becomes honest.
It's ill shaving against the wool.
If the cap fit, wear it.
If the cap fits, wear it 
If the shoe fits, wear it 
Gentle strokes make the sweetest harmony.
Whom the Gods love die young
Well-drawn wells give the sweetest water.
Oysters are not good in the month that hath not an R in
Make not fish of one, and flesh of another.
The shoemaker's son always goes barefoot 
Make a virtue of necessity.
Cobbler always wears the worst shoes
Sir John Barleycorn is the strongest knight.
The hind had as lief see his wife on the bier, As Candlemas day should be pleasant and clear.
Absence makes the heart grow fonder 
Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.
Blue are the hills that are far away
Knavery may serve for a turn, but honesty is best in the
Matrimony's a matter of money.
St Bartholomew brings the cold dew.
All lay load on the willing horse.
Standers by see more than the gamesters.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure
An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of wit.
An ounce of mother-wit is worth a pound of clergy.
Bring not a bagpipe to a man in trouble.
Good October, a good blast, To blow the hog acorn and mast.
If the twenty-fourth of August be fair and clear, Then hope for a prosperous autumn that year.
Drive not a second nail till the first is clenched.
The longest day must have an end.
When things get to the worst, they'll mend.
There is one good wife in the country, and every man thinks
You cannot know wine by the barrel.
God sends meat, and the devil sends cooks.
It is too late, to spare when the bottom is bare.
It is easy to find a staff to beat a dog.
He that stumbles twice over the same stone, deserves to
Reconcile yourself to present trials, the future may
He who sups with the Devil should have a long spoon
I can see as far into a millstone as the picker.
Don't leave your manners on the doorstep
Many things grow in the garden that were never planted
Every one puts his fault on the times.
In a thousand pounds of law there's not an ounce of love.
The horse thinks one thing, and he that rides him another.
There's a time and a place for everything 
Out of sight, out of mind.
Happy is the wooing, That is not long a-doing.
Less of your courtesy, and more of your purse.
Experience is a dear school, but it is the only one we
Out of debt, out of danger.
The wife that expects to have a good name Is always at home as if she were lame, And the maid that is honest her chiefest delight Is still to be doing from morning to night.
Once a use and ever a custom.
It's poor sport that is not worth the candle.
Make the vine poor, and it will make you rich.
"Welcome death," quoth the rat, when the trap fell down.
A thousand pounds and a pottle of hay is all one thing at
Fish always stink from the head down 
Man is the head, but woman turns it.
Stretch not your feet Beyond the sheet.
It is one thing to flourish and another to fight.
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step 
Clouds that the sun builds up darken him.
Apple never falls far from the tree
Feed a cold and starve a fever
He that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.
The thorn comes forth with his point forwards.
A bargain is a bargain.
A great dowry is a bed full of troubles.
An evening red and a morning grey, Is a sign of a fair day.
Don't let the bastards grind you down 
Accidents will happen (in the best-regulated families).
A single fact is worth a ship-load of argument.
Many can pack the cards that cannot play.
The tongue's not steel, yet it cuts.
Who spits against the wind spits in his own face.
Grief pent up will burst the heart.
Let not the cobbler go beyond his last.
A wink's as good as a nod to a blind horse.
A nod's as good as a wink to a blind horse 
No man is his craft's master the first day.
Cold of complexion, good of condition.
The crow thinks her own bird fairest.
There's as good fish in the sea as were ever caught.
One scabbed sheep infects the whole flock.
Set a thief to take a thief.
It never goes well when the hen crows.
English are a nation of shopkeepers
No weather is ill If the wind be still.
Sorrow comes unsent for, and, like the unbidden guest,
Set a thief to catch a thief
Pearls of wisdom
Better to remain silent and be thought a fool that to speak and remove all doubt
Bigger they are, the harder they fall
To woo is a pleasure in young men, a fault in old.
Takes a thief to catch a thief
Throw a sprat to catch a whale.
An empty purse fills the face with wrinkles.
It takes a thief to catch a thief
A good horse cannot be of a bad colour.
A man cannot both wive and thrive in a year.
If you play with a fool at home, he'll play with you in the
A cold May, Plenty of corn and hay.
An ounce of knowledge may be worth a pound of comfort.
The mouse that hath but one hole is easily taken.
The bread always falls buttered side down
He who hath most peas may put most in the pot.
When Candlemas day is come and gone, The snow lies on a hot stone.
Ain't over till the fat lady sings
Life is just a bowl of cherries
It ain't over till the fat lady sings
The thief's sorry because he is caught, not because he is
A house is not a home
Better it is to meet a bear bereaved of her whelps, than a
If the ash before the oak comes out, There has been, or there will be drought.
Give a dog a bone in his mouth, and you may kick him and he
You may as well bid me lade the sea with a nutshell.
Pull down your hat on the wind side.
Two things you won't fret o'er, If you're a wise man-- The thing you can't help, And the thing that you can.
Study to be worthy of your parents.
A swarm in May is worth a load of hay; a swarm in June is worth a silver spoon; but a swarm in July is not worth a fly
Thing of beauty is a joy forever
Two of a trade seldom agree.
He that shows his purse longs to be rid of it.
A friend in need is a friend indeed.
You cannot make a purse of a sow's ear.
You can't make a horn of a pig's tail.
He goes not out of his way that goes to a good inn.
He that will not be ruled by the rudder must be ruled by
All the keys hang not at one man's girdle.
Be a good husband, and you will get a penny to spend, a
I'll not change a cottage in possession for a kingdom in
Who would keep a cow when he may have a bottle of milk for a
A doctor and a clown know more than a doctor alone.
A place for everything and everything in its place 
There is a time to speak as well as to be silent.
A feast is not made of mushrooms only.
Birds of a feather flock together.
Three women and a goose make a market.
The brain that sows not corn, plants thistles.
You cannot drive a windmill with a pair of bellows.
Charity covers a multitude of sins
You must go into the country to hear what news at London.
Better go about than fall into the ditch.
Any flat can talk of change of weather.
He wants to have a finger in every pie.
A bushel of March dust is worth a king's ransom.
When poverty comes in at the door, friendship leaps out
Jack of all trades, master of none 
If it were not for hope, the heart would break.
Sow beans in the mud, they'll grow like wood.
Let not the sun go down on your wrath 
The lion's not half so fierce as he's painted.
Enough and to spare is too much.
A windy March and a rainy April make a beautiful May.
Honesty is the best policy; but he who acts on this
The fox knows much, but more he that catcheth him.
Fair and softly go far in a day.
A dark man's a jewel in a fair woman's eye.
There's reason in roasting of eggs.
A hog in armour is still but a hog.
When the child is christened, you may have godfathers
When the cuckoo comes to the bare thorn, Sell your cow and buy your corn, But when she comes to a full bit, Sell your corn, and buy your sheep.
Who goes worse shod than the cobbler's wife?
The master's eye does more work than his hands.
Journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step
Make not a toil of your pleasure.
He that will not go over the stile must be thrust through
If the mountain will not go to Mahomet, let Mahomet go
As great a pity to see a woman weep, as to see a goose go
He is in clover.
Do not buy a pig in a poke.
A good maxim is never out of season.
The ignorant think all things wrong which they cannot
None is so wise but the fool overtakes him sometimes.
He would starve in a cook-shop.
Don't let the grass grow under your feet
A man in a passion rides a horse that runs away with him.
A wager is a fool's argument.
If you regard old saws, mind, thus they say, It is bad to marry in the month of May.
Butter is gold in the morning, silver at noon, lead at
Never let the sun go down on your anger
When the tree falls every man runs with his hatchet.
He must needs swim that's held up by the chin.
A woman is only a woman, but a good cigar is a smoke
A change is as good as a rest 
To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive 
A miss is as good as a mile.
The mob has many heads, but no brains.
Nod's as good as a wink to a blind horse
Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise 
One man may better steal a horse than another look over the
In a calm sea every man is a pilot.
Every man is a pilot in a calm sea.
A penny in your pocket is a good companion.
A gift with a kind countenance is a double gift.
Opera ain't over till the fat lady sings
On a dark night an owl would be glad of a lantern.
Be not weary of well-doing.
To every thing there is a season
Give a dog a bad name and hang him
Better to give than to receive
Failing to plan is planning to fail 
A place for everything, and everything in its place.
Age of miracles is past
Confession of a fault makes half amends for it.
It's good to be merry and wise.
Wages of sin is death
When the tree is down, every one runs with his hatchet.
Between a woman's yes and no, There is not room for a pin to go.
Sell not the hare's skin before you have caught him.
Tread on a worm and it will turn.
He is a real friend who assists one in a pinch.
A good man is hard to find 
Venture a small fish to catch a great one.
A hand-saw is a good thing, but not to shave with.
Tell that tale to a deaf man.
It is a good horse that never stumbles, and a good wife
Be bail and pay for it.
Any port in a storm 
Labourer is worthy of his hire
Where God hath His church the devil will have his chapel.
Four farthings and a thimble make a tailor's pocket
Being born in a stable does not make a man a horse.
Truth lies in a well.
He who gets four pounds and spends five has no need of a
Every man will shoot at the enemy, but few will go to fetch
Where the hedge is lowest, men commonly leap over.
Nothing is impossible to a willing mind.
Like a treatise on light and colours by a blind man.
A growing youth hath a wolf in his stomach.
Ashes to ashes dust to dust 
The tongue breaketh bone, Though itself have none.
Rome was not built in a day.
Of nothing comes nothing.
Wider ears and a shorter tongue.
There is no deceit in a brimmer.
You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear
The best physicians are Doctor Diet, Doctor Cheeriman, and Doctor Quiet.
He that is afraid of wounds must not come near a battle
Give a man a fish and you will feed him for a day...
It is easier to pull down than to build.
The world was never so dull but if one won't another will.
A good wife and health Are a man's best wealth.
One pair of heels is often worth two pair of hands.
An ill marriage is a spring of ill fortune.
Barley straw's good fodder when the cow gives water.
Who draws his sword against his prince must throw away the
Love and a cough cannot be hid.
You cannot get blood out of a stone.
You can't get blood out of a stone 
Of saving cometh having.
You can't get blood out of a turnip 
Fair and foolish, black and proud, Long and lazy, little and loud.
Of sufferance comes ease.
Slow and sure.
Every one as they like best, as the good man said when he
All's fair in love and war 
Live and learn.
March comes in like a lion, and goes out like a lamb
Where every hand fleeceth, the sheep go naked.
My son is my son till he marries a wife, But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life.
Older and wiser.
A woman's strength is in her tongue.
Forgive and forget.
A little knowledge is a dangerous thing 
Bear and forbear.
He knows not a hawk from a hand-saw.
A little learning is a dangerous thing 
DAVID'S DAY. Upon St. David's day, Put oats and barley in the clay.
Rolling in cash he can't use, like a cat in a corn-bin.
Send a wise man on an errand and say nothing to him.
A mouse, in time, may bite in two a cable.
Better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all
A black plum is as sweet as a white.
Every one has a penny to spend at a new ale-house.
In time of prosperity friends will be plenty, In time of adversity, not one among twenty.
You can have too much of a good thing
Be it better or be it worse, Be ruled by him who bears the purse.
A dog is a man's best friend 
It is safe riding in a good haven.
A problem shared is a problem halved 
Early to bed, and early to rise, Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
Put a snake in your bosom, and when it is warm it will
A penny saved is a penny got.
A clear conscience is a sure card.
He was born with a silver spoon in his mouth.
A contented mind is a continual feast.
A fool and his money are soon parted.
A trouble shared is a trouble halved
It is folly to dig for lead with a silver shovel.
There's nothing agrees worse than a proud mind and a
Anger is short-lived in a good man.
Little dogs start the hare, but great ones catch it.
A penny saved is a penny earned 
As well be hung for a sheep as a lamb.
Counsel is never out of date.
Pen and ink are a wit's plough.
Where we least think, there goeth the hare away.
No one knows where the shoe pinches so well as him who
A man never surfeits of too much honesty.
A little of what you fancy does you good 
Fish are not to be caught by a birdcall.
Fall not out with a friend for a trifle.
Fair and softly as lawyers go to heaven.
Place for everything and everything in its place
Evil is wrought by want of thought, As well as want of heart.
Everyone wants to go to heaven but nobody wants to die
It takes all sorts to make a world
It is a blot on his escutcheon.
To err is human; to forgive divine.
Better go to bed supperless than to rise in debt.
Ask a silly question and you'll get a silly answer 
He that by the plough would thrive, Himself must either hold or drive.
A man of gladness seldom falls into madness.
"Sour grapes," as the fox said when he could not
Woman is only a woman, but a good cigar is a smoke
Friend in need is a friend indeed
A blind man would be glad to see it.
Many a little makes a mickle 
It's better to give than to receive 
I have a bone in my arm.
Better be a beggar than a fool.
Way to a man's heart is through his stomach
Mettle is dangerous in a blind horse.
Though the sun shines, leave not your cloak at home.
See a pin and pick it up, all the day you'll have good luck; see a pin and let it lie, bad luck you'll have all day 
Better to travel hopefully than to arrive
Though the cat winks awhile, yet sure she is not blind.
After a storm comes a calm.
Many a mickle makes a muckle
If the first of July, it be rainy weather, 'Twill rain more or less for four weeks together.
Keep a thing seven years, and you will find a use for it.
Takes all sorts to make a world
A man may lose his goods for want of demanding them.
Monday's child is fair of face
It's a wicked thing to make a dearth one's garner.
A prophet is not recognized in his own land
Little sticks kindle the fire, but great ones put it out.
It's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all 
A child may have too much of his mother's blessing.
When the sloe-tree is as white as a sheet, Sow your barley, whether it be dry or wet.
A cat may look at a king.
A picture paints a thousand words 
Short and sweet like a donkey's gallop.
Price of liberty is eternal vigilance
Patience is a virtue
A fool is fulsome.
Wedlock is a padlock.
Knowledge in youth is wisdom in age.
More ways of killing a cat than choking it with cream
My son's my son till he hath got him a wife, But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life.
Many a slip 'twixt cup and lip
A mere scholar a mere ass.
Wedding and ill-wintering tame both man and beast.
A bird that can sing and won't sing, must be made to sing.
It's good to have company in trouble.
Don't keep a dog and bark yourself 
Better a fortune in her than on her.
Best-laid schemes of mice and men gang aft agley
A stitch in time saves nine.
Speak softly and carry a big stick 
He that would learn to pray let him go to sea.
Who buys hath need of a hundred eyes. Who sells hath need of one.
One can never have too much of a good thing.
Apt to promise, apt to forget.
For everything there is a season 
Do as you are bidden and you'll never be to blame.
Give it plenty of elbow grease.
A liar should have a good memory.
House is not a home
Rome wasn't built in a day 
February fill dike, be it black or be it white; But if it be white, it's the better to like.
Of idleness comes no goodness.
Remove an old tree and it will wither to death.
Whatever you do, whatever you say, Tell your doctor and lawyer the truth alway.
Patience is a flower that grows not in every one's
Touch a galled horse, and he will wince.
It is good to be merry at meat.
A dry May and a dripping June, Does surely bring all things in tune.
Foxes, when they cannot reach the grapes, say they are not
As like as chalk and cheese.
Be captain of your own ship.
All is fish that comes to his net.
One may as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb.
Where there's a will there's a way.
Be slow to promise, but quick to perform.
To a crazy ship all winds are contrary.
Salmon and sermon have their season in Lent.
Never make troubles of trifles.
As sound as a nut.
As dead as a door-nail.
Eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth
As blind as a bat.
Better to be beaten than be in bad company.
'tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all 
He that makes a good war makes a good peace.
One might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb
He giveth twice who gives in a trice.
He that buys a house ready wrought, Hath many a pin and nail for nought.
Too much of one thing is good for nothing.
Many a true word is spoken in jest.
They talk of Christmas so long that it comes.
Even a clown clings to his cloak when it rains.
There are more ways of killing a cat than choking it with cream 
It's a bad dog that deserves not a crust.
Fire is a good servant but a bad master
A fat sorrow is better than a lean one.
April borrows three days of March, and they are ill.
Like will to like.
He's a good friend that speaks well of us behind our
A man who is his own lawyer has a fool for his client 
As long lives a merry heart as a sad.
There is nothing certain in this life but death and taxes!
Live not to eat, but eat to live.
Better wear a cloak for religion than religion for a
He that would be Pope must think of nothing else.
Women and children first 
He hath a good judgment who is apt to distrust his own.
A drowning man will catch at a straw.
A drowning man will clutch at a straw 
Enough is as good as a feast.
Change is as good as a rest
February makes a bridge, and March breaks it.
A cold April a barn will fill.
Red sky at night shepherd's delight; red sky in the morning, shepherd's warning 
Miss is as good as a mile
Cleanliness is next to godliness
It's better to travel hopefully than to arrive 
A fat kitchen, a lean will.
Better lose a jest than a friend.
A good recorder sets all in order.
Think of ease, but work on.
Each to their own
An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth
Land was never lost for want of an heir.
A sceptre is one thing, a ladle another.
Every man must eat a peck of ashes before he dies.
Beware of Greeks bearing gifts 
Look at your corn in May, You'll come weeping away; Look at the same in June You'll come home in another tune.
It takes two to tango
Birds of prey do not sing.
He that goes far from home for a wife, either intends to
A good wife makes a good husband.
Do as most do, and fewest will speak ill of thee.
Utility is preferable to grandeur.
A broken leg is not healed by a silk stocking.
Cut and come again.
What! keep a dog and bark myself?
Give a man enough rope and he will hang himself
A good beginning makes a good ending.
A man at five may be a fool at fifteen.
He that cannot abide a bad market deserves not a good
It takes one to know one
A good winter brings a good summer.
He that will not stoop for a pin, shall never be worth a
A hot May makes a fat churchyard.
A good dog deserves a good bone.
See a pin and let it lie, Want a pin before you die.
At a great bargain make a great pause.
He that will steal a pin will steal a better thing.
A snow year, a rich year.
It chanceth in an hour that comes not in seven years.
Old friends to meet, old wine to drink, and old wood
A cherry year, a merry year.
Choose your wife on Saturday, and not on a Sunday.
A small pack suits a small pedlar.
He would split a hair.
Time is a great healer
Once a thief, always a thief
There's many a slip 'twixt cup and lip
This rule in gardening never forget, To sow dry and set wet.
Live and let live.
A living dog is better than a dead lion.
Swine, women, and bees are not to be turned.
A woman's mind and winter wind often change.
Better one's house too little one day, than too big all the
A man is known by his friends
A drunken night makes a cloudy morning.
A heavy purse makes a light heart.
There are many ways of killing a dog beside hanging him.
Patch and sit long, build and soon flit.
A nimble ninepence is better than a slow shilling.
Why keep a dog and bark yourself? 
Jack-in-office is a great man.
Poor folk are glad of pottage.
Get what you can, and what you get, hold, It is the stone which will turn your lead into gold.
He that is born to be hanged shall never be drowned.
A green winter makes a fat churchyard.
A crooked tree will have a crooked shadow.
One tongue is enough for a woman.
A hungry horse makes a clean manger.
Love lives in cottages as well as in courts.
All things are soon prepared in a well-ordered
It is never too late to mend.
Beware of "Had I wist."
Who loves his glass without a G, Take away L and that is he.
Every man to his trade.
A tree is known by its fruit, and not by its leaves.
Share and share alike.
You can't make ropes of sand.
It is a long lane that has no turning.
Believe well and have well.
There's more than one way to skin a cat 
It is easy to bowl down hill.
You cannot hide an eel in a sack.
Proportion your expenses to what you have, not to what
Marry above your match and you get a master.
Patience is a plaister for all sores.
I'm too old a bird to be caught by chaff.
Never tell tales out of school
He that lives upon his wits, breaks for want of stock.
War, hunting, and law, are as full of trouble as pleasure.
A man may cause his own dog to bite him.
Diligence is a good patrimony.
Just is honest, and honest is just.
Brag's a good dog, but Holdfast is a better.
Hope is a good breakfast, but a bad supper.
Anything for a quiet life.
Should it rain on Easter Day, There'll be plenty of grass and little hay.
It is an ill guest that never drinks to his host.
It's a bad cause that none dare speak in.
Takes one to know one
Good to begin well; better to end well.
He stands in his own light.
It is an ill dog that deserves not a bone.
Cruelty is a devil's delight.
Good man is hard to find
That penny is well spent that saves a groat.
A small leak will sink a great ship.
Nothing is certain but death and taxes 
He that leaves certainty and sticks to chance, When fools pipe he may dance.
East is east, and west is west
There are more ways to kill a dog than hanging.
Every couple is not a pair.
A little house well fill'd, A little land well till'd, And a little wife well will'd.
A fool demands much, but he's a greater that gives it.
It is all one a hundred years hence.
A ragged colt may make a good horse.
Monday for wealth, Tuesday for health, Wednesday the best day of all; Thursday for crosses, Friday for losses, Saturday no luck at all.
A fool may give a wise man counsel.
Listeners never hear good of themselves.
It is good keeping his clothes who is going to swim.
Seek and you shall find 
A rugged stone grows smooth from hand to hand.
He tied a knot with his tongue he couldn't undo with his
If ifs and ands were pots and pans there'd be no work for tinkers
A bad day never hath a good night.
He that labours and thrives, spins gold.
They that have no other meat, Bread and butter are glad to eat.
He is not wise that is not wise for himself.
A man may hold his tongue in an ill time.
Time and tide wait for no man 
Soldiers in peace are like chimneys in summer.
Time and tide tarry for no man.
Fools rush in where angels fear to tread 
A good horse often wants a good spur.
To him that wills ways are not wanting.
A fair face may hide a foul heart.
It is better to be born lucky than rich.
Money is more easily made than made use of.
First creep and then go.
Vows made in storms are forgotten in calms.
Give a thief rope enough and he'll hang himself.
Many a good cow hath had a bad calf.
What is a workman without his tools?
All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.
Judge not of men or things at first sight.
He who is born to be hanged will never be drowned.
Men dream in courtship but in wedlock wake.
It is no small conquest to overcome yourself.
Bear with evil and expect good.
Bitter is sweet to hungry men.
A woman's tongue wags like a lamb's tail.
He loseth his thanks who promiseth and delayeth.
I have other fish to fry.
First deserve and then desire.
Change of pasture makes fat calves.
Cowardice is afraid to be known or seen.
You may know by a penny how a shilling spends.
Wine is a turncoat, first a friend, then an
Life lies not in living, but in liking.
A fool may ask more questions in half an hour than a wise man
Everything hath an end, and a pudding hath two.
He that hath a trade hath an estate.
Only fools and horses work
Happy is he who knows his follies in his youth.
Little of what you fancy does you good
Who thinks to live must live to think, Else mind and body lose their link.
Life's not all beer and skittles 
All things come to those that wait 
It's no use looking for musk in a dog's kennel.
Children should be seen and not heard 
Thrifty men are fond of thrifty sayings.
We must not look for a golden life in an iron age.
He that is angry without a cause must be pleased without
Trust in God, and keep your powder dry.
Death is deaf and hears no denial.
Maidens must be seen and not heard.
Crosses are ladders that lead to heaven.
There's ne'er a why, but there's a wherefore.
He robs Peter to pay Paul.
Do well, and have well.
There's many a true word spoken in jest.
A little mischief is too much.
It is more painful to do nothing than something.
Drink water like an ox, wine like a king of Spain.
You cannot eat your cake and have it.
When wine is in, wit is out.
He that revealeth his secret maketh himself a slave.
Fool and his money are soon parted
Great pain and little gain make a man soon weary.
An exception to every rule
He that hath a good harvest may be content with some
A wise man changes his mind; a fool never.
Great cry and little wool.
Man reigns and woman rules.
Lowly sit and be richly warm.
They that will not work in heat, must hunger in frost.
Fools always come short of their reckoning.
Saying and doing are two things.
A little good is soon spent.
Self love's a mote in every man's eye.
Crosses are ladders for getting to heaven.
Civil words cost nothing, and go a long way.
He who fights and runs away, may live to fight another day
A burden which one chooses is not felt.
A woman's work is never done
He that speaks me fair and loves me not, I'll speak him fair and trust him not.
Good and quickly seldom meet.
Every man is either a fool or a physician after thirty years
He that endureth is not overcome.
Oil and water don't mix
He must stoop that hath a low door.
Hanging and wiving go by destiny.
If you make not much of threepence you'll ne'er be
Who has not a good tongue, ought to have good hands.
He covers me with his wings, and bites me with his bill.
Bad workmen always complain of their tools.
Simon Noland, clown, is a better style and title than
Road to hell is paved with good intentions
Little knowledge is a dangerous thing
Moderation in all things
Little learning is a dangerous thing
Good things come to those that wait 
He that riseth betimes hath something in his head.
Remove an old tree and it will wither.
Pride will have a fall.
A little pot is soon hot.
Best defence is a good offence
He lies as fast as a dog can trot.
A woman's work is never at an end.
Every man for himself, and God for us all.
Good measure is a merry mean.
Everything is good in its season.
Prophet is not recognized in his own land
All roads lead to Rome
Sorrow and bad weather come unsent for.
Every man is best known to himself.
You may be a wise man though you cannot make a watch.
Man who is his own lawyer has a fool for his client
Begging is an ill trade on a fast-day.
Critics are like brushers of other men's clothes.
Two's company and three's none.
Well may he smell of fire whose gown burneth.
Fair fall truth and daylight.
All play and no work, Gives Tom a ragged shirt.
A man is not so soon healed as hurt.
Dog is a man's best friend
Whoso lacketh a stock, his gain's not worth a chip.
Problem shared is a problem halved
A bald head is soon shaven.
A good word is as soon said as an ill one.
One swallow makes not a spring, nor one woodcock a
You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink 
Be not too hasty to outbid another.
He's up at five, And he will thrive.
Penny wise and pound foolish.
It is a hard battle where none escapes.
Shear your sheep in May, And shear them all away.
Pity, promises, and blame, are always cheap and plentiful.
Sit in your place, and none can make you rise.
A green wound is soon healed.
A fool's bolt is soon shot.
A thin meadow is soon mowed.
Trouble shared is a trouble halved
Who in Janiveer sows oats, gets gold and groats.
Calm weather in June sets corn in tune.
Man doth what he can, and God what He will.
Penny saved is a penny earned
Never go to bed on an argument
A friend is not so soon gotten as lost.
A man can do more than he can.
Honour and ease are seldom bed-fellows.
Who more busy than they that have least to do.
If Christmas Day on a Monday be, A great winter that year you will see.
All good things come to he who waits 
A man's best fortune or his worst is his wife.
Children and fools have merry lives.
Walnuts and pears you plant for your heirs 
Make much of one, good men are scarce.
Never too old to learn.
Two sides to every question
To him that hath lost his taste, sweet is sour.
No man loves his fetters, though of gold.
They look one way and row another.
A man may dig his grave with his teeth.
As good sit still as rise up and fall.
Better be ill spoken of by one before all, than by all
A bad workman quarrels with his tools.
Commend a wedded life, but keep thyself a batchelor.
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link 
A bad custom is like a good cake, better broken than
Every one can tame a shrew but he that hath her.
You can't have your cake and eat it too
Nature abhors a vacuum
Trust not a broken staff.
He that pryeth into every cloud, may be stricken with a
If a job is worth doing it is worth doing well
March wind and May sun, Make clothes white and maids dun.
He that waits for a dead man's shoes may go long
Trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth.
Of evil grain no good seed can come.
Love and lordship like no fellowship.
Plain dealing's a jewel.
Much would have more, and lost all.
Children and chickens must be always picking.
Many go for wool and come back shorn.
Venture not all in one ship.
A man must plough with such oxen as he hath.
Slander leaves a score behind it.
Speak fair and think what you will.
He who more than his worth doth spend, Makes a rope his life to end; He who spends more than he should, Shall not have to spend when he would.
He dances well to whom fortune pipes.
On painting and fighting look aloof off.
Like carrying coals to Newcastle.
A fool may make money, but a wise man should spend it.
A beggar can never be bankrupt.
A good name is better than riches.
He is wise enough that can keep himself warm in winter.
So many frosts in March, so many in May.
Pay him in his own coin.
Some are wise, and some are otherwise.
He who lies long in bed his estate feels it.
Haste makes waste, and waste makes want, and want makes
Claw me, and I will claw you.
With what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you
You are never too old to learn
Love will find a way
Sadness and gladness succeed each other.
It is not lost that comes at last.
Marriages are made in heaven.
Everything comes to him who waits
Bachelors, before you marry, Have a house wherein to tarry.
Even a worm will turn 
Old young, and old long.
He that will too soon be his own master, will have a fool
Time and straw make medlars ripe.
Next to love, quietness.
He who would have a hare for breakfast must hunt over
Don't throw pearls to swine
In vain he craves advice who will not follow it.
Love and lordship never like friendship.
There are two sides to every question
Learn to say before you sing.
He who serves well need not be afraid to ask his wages.
A bad excuse is better than none at all.
He that is warm thinks all are so.
Misunderstanding brings lies to town.
He that hath nothing is not contented.
Rob Peter to pay Paul 
A cat loves fish, but she's loth to wet her feet.
It is not in mortals to command success, But we'll do more, Sempronius, we'll deserve it.
Old friends and old wine are best.
If youth knew what age will crave, It sure would strive to get and save.
It's better to be lucky than wise.
Fancy may bolt bran and think it flour.
Two is company, but three's a crowd
Get thy spindle and thy distaff ready, and God will send thee
Pour not water on a drowned mouse.
Joy surfeited turns to sorrow.
Account not that work slavery That brings in penny savoury.
There's an exception to every rule 
Course of true love never did run smooth
Industry is fortune's right hand and frugality her left.
Cruelty is a tyrant always attended by fear.
Cat may look at a king
A low hedge is easily leapt over.
Every sow to her own trough.
In an orderly house all is soon ready.
What a man sows, that shall he also reap.
Wishers and woulders are never good householders.
No rose without a thorn.
"Say well," and "do well," end with one letter; To say well, it is well, but to do well is better.
He that would please all, and himself too, Undertakes what he cannot do.
That which is evil is soon learnt.
Spare when young and spend when old.
Laws, like spiders' webs, are wrought, Large flies break through, the small are caught.
There's safety in numbers
A good surgeon must have an eagle's eye, a lion's heart,
No such thing as a free lunch
He fisheth on that catcheth one.
Life is full of hazards, which experience neither bought nor
A tradesman who gets not loseth.
If Candlemas day be fair and bright, Winter will have another flight; If on Candlemas day it be shower and rain, Winter is gone, and will not come again.
Weight and measure take away strife.
Pull gently on a weak rope.
One cannot be in two places at once.
Brag's a good dog, but that he hath lost his tail.
Do unto others as you would have them do to you 
Spend and be free, but make no waste.
A volunteer is worth twenty pressed men
Never be ashamed to eat your meat.
You may go farther and fare worse.
Care will kill a cat.
One man may lead a horse to water, but fifty cannot make him
That's but an empty purse that's full of other men's
He who blusters without reason has most reason to
Bachelors' wives and maids' children are always
Itch and ease can no man please.
A poor man's table is soon spread.
Devil makes work for idle hands to do
Praise a fair day at night.
A fault once denied is twice committed.
Revenge is a dish best served cold 
Do not spur a free horse.
Half a loaf is better than no bread.
Credit lost is a Venice glass broken.
Nine tailors make a man
Desert and reward seldom keep company.
Make not thy friend too cheap to thee, nor thyself to thy
Cheese it is a peevish elf, It digests all things but itself.
Ask no questions and hear no lies
A story never loses by re-telling.
Wit ill applied is a dangerous weapon.
Many drops make a shower.
True praise takes root and spreads.
He that is thrown would ever wrestle.
Set trees poor, and they will grow rich; set them rich, and
Riches are like muck, which stink in a heap, but spread
Fancy goes a long way.
Never venture out of your depth until you can swim.
Who sows in May gets little that way.
Fools set stools for wise folk to stumble at.
A new broom sweeps clean.
None but fools and fiddlers sing at their meat.
If you would have a good cheese, and have'n old, You must turn'n seven times before he is cold.
Fields have eyes, and woods have ears.
Hedges have eyes, and walls have ears.
Good words fill not a sack.
Never refuse a good offer.
Christmas comes but once a year.
Help yourself and your friends will like you.
A woman conceals what she knows not.
Two wrongs will not make a right.
Ask but enough, and you may lower as you list.
A penny in my purse will bid me drink when all my friends I
Pride comes before a fall 
Those who do not learn from history are doomed to repeat it
On Candlemas day throw candle and candle-stick away.
I wept when I was born, and every day shows why.
They who have money are troubled about it, And they who have none are troubled without it.
Gems must not be valued by what they are set in.
Do not live poor to die rich.
One swallow does not make a summer.
He that gapeth until he be fed Well may he gape until he be dead.
One woodcock does not make a winter.
No man can flay a stone.
All that glitters is not gold.
All that glisters is not gold 
Brag's a good dog if he be well set on; but he dare not bite.
He that's needy when he is married Shall be rich when he is buried.
Still stand by kin Through thick and thin.
He that waits on another man's trencher, makes many a late
By doing nothing we learn to do ill.
A wonder lasts but nine days.
All good things must come to an end
He that will not be counselled cannot be helped.
Every picture tells a story
Drowning man will clutch at a straw
Put no faith in tale-bearers.
He that lives not well one year sorrows for it seven.
A watched pot never boils.
A barking dog never bites
A cat has nine lives, yet care will kill a cat.
Good ale is meat, drink, and cloth.
A whet is no let [hindrance].
Eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die 
Don't wake a sleeping dog.
Eat a bit before you drink.
One may see day at a little hole.
Picture paints a thousand words
Every path hath a puddle.
Pepper is black, yet it hath a good smack.
Carefully spend, and God will send.
A smart reproof is better than smooth deceit.
An old cat laps as much as a young kitten.
Foolish pity spoils a city.
Youth and white paper take any impression.
So many mists in March you see, So many frosts in May will be.
Who so blind as he that will not see?
No one is a fool always; every one sometimes.
Never judge a book by its cover
Many words will not fill a bushel.
Fire and water are good servants but bad masters.
Best things in life are free
If things were to be done twice, all would be wise.
A false report rides post.
In dock, out nettle.
Learning makes a man fit company for himself.
That which is easily done is soon believed.
Men strain at gnats, and swallow camels!
Love rules his kingdom without a sword.
Fish and guests smell after three days
A May flood never did good.
Good words without deeds Are rushes and reeds.
A generous confession disarms slander.
He who maketh others wretched is himself a wretch, whether
Longest journey starts with a single step
When a musician hath forgot his note, he makes as though
A poor workman always blames his tools
There's no such thing as a free lunch 
It is good fish if it were but caught.
Stitch in time saves nine
On Candlemas day you must have half your straw and half
He that tells his wife news is but newly married.
There's no companion like a penny.
Better be alone than in bad company.
Cloudy mornings turn to clear evenings.
An old dog barks not in vain.
You can't judge a book by its cover
Cheaters never win and winners never cheat
You may truss up all his wit in an egg-shell.
Two wrongs don't make a right
Never trust yourself out of your depth till you can swim.
Friday's sail, sure to fail.
You pays your money and you takes your choice
A man may bear till his back breaks.
Such a beginning, such an end.
A rising tide lifts all boats
Two blacks don't make a white
Advice comes too late when a thing is done.
He knows on which side his bread is buttered.
He who drinks when he is not dry, will be dry when he has no
"He that wolde not when he might, He shall not when he wold-a."
Every cloud has a silver lining 
Promises are too much like pie-crusts, made to be
Catch a bird by putting salt on its tail.
A bribe will enter without knocking.
Argus at home, but a mole abroad.
Sweet discourse makes short days and nights.
With stomach, wife, and conscience keep on good terms.
Eating and drinking takes away one's appetite.
That suit is best that best fits me.
Never fish in troubled waters.
Don't change horses in midstream 
A bird can roost upon but one branch.
Don't try to run before you can walk
Ne'er cast a clout till May be out 
He who hesitates is lost
A bad penny always turns up 
A hungry man, an angry man.
A close mouth catcheth no flies.
Sorrow will wear away in time.
A life spent worthily should be measured by deeds--not
Don't try to walk before you can crawl
Never give a sucker an even break 
A leopard cannot change its spots 
Life is what you make it
A guilty conscience needs no accuser.
A noble housekeeper needs no doors.
Give him an inch, and he'll take an ell.
A rolling stone gathers no moss.
Many a good tune played on an old fiddle
He is most loved that hath most bags.
If you want a thing done, do it yourself.
Sluts are good enough to make slovens' pottage.
When two Sundays come in one week--that is, never.
Why, butter would not melt in his mouth!
Better a bare foot than no foot at all.
A wilful man never wants woe.
Good beginning makes a good ending
That is true which all men say.
More have been drowned in wine than water.
A rotten apple injures its companions.
They that can cobble and clout, Shall have work when others go without.
Forced fruits fail in flavour.
Counsels in wine seldom prosper.
Poverty makes a man acquainted with strange bed-fellows.
Cut your coat according to your cloth.
When April blows his horn, It's both good for hay and corn.
Cut your coat to suit your cloth
A mother's heart never grows old.
A creaking gate hangs longest on its hinges.
Stretch your legs according to your coverlet.
If Janiveer calends be summerly gay 'Twill be winterly weather till calends of May.
He that throws away his estate with his hands, goes
Dainty dogs may have to eat dirty puddings.
An old doctor, a young lawyer.
Fair words will not keep a cat from starving.
Tell me what company you keep, and I will tell you who you
Fools tie knots and wise men loose them.
Light gains make a heavy purse.
If wilful will to water, wilful must be drowned.
Keep your friends close and your enemies closer
If a man once fall, all will tread on him.
A good lawyer, an evil neighbour.
On Valentine's day will a good goose lay, If she be a good goose, her dame well to pay, She will lay two eggs before Valentine's day.
A full purse never lacketh friends.
He is poor indeed that cannot promise nothing.
If you must have an evil, choose a little one.
An unhappy lad may make a good man.
A great ship needs deep waters.
Pride goes before, and shame follows after.
Like a barber's chair, fit for every buttock.
Don't teach your Grandma to suck eggs 
A hedge between Keeps friendship green.
A wet August never brings dearth.
Man is known by his friends
A plant often removed cannot thrive.
Two in distress make sorrows less.
You may draw him which way you will, with a twine thread.
A scalded cat fears cold water.
A soft answer turneth away wrath.
Green wood makes a hot fire.
He that sings on Friday shall weep on Sunday.
If you want a thing done well, do it yourself
If fools went not to market, bad ware would not be sold.
Trust not still water nor a silent man.
Every cloud hath a silver lining.
He that loves law will get his fill.
Good things come in small packages
A golden key can open any door 
Daylight will peep through a small hole.
Every "may be" hath a "may not be."
To split knotty timber use smooth wedges.
Where there is smoke there is fire.
A man may buy gold too dear.
Marry in haste, repent at leisure.
A bow long bent at last waxeth weak.
Curses are like chickens, they come home to roost.
An honest man's word is as good as his bond.
Do as you would be done by.
Whom we love best to them we can say least.
Better an empty house than a bad tenant.
There's many a good tune played on an old fiddle
Life is half spent before we know what it is.
If youth knew what age would crave. It would both get and save.
Don't put all your eggs in one basket
It is sooner said than done.
It is ill meddling with edged tools.
If at first you don't succeed try, try and try again
Do as I say, not as I do
It is an ill bird that defiles its own nest.
Love asks faith, and faith asks firmness.
Adversity makes a man wise, not rich.
Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them.
It never rains but it pours.
Pater-noster built churches, and Our Father pulls them
It's good fishing in troubled waters.
They are as mute as fishes.
Little birds may peck a dead lion.
He that longs most lacks most.
No man knows better what good is than he that has an endured
He that doth not lend doth lose his friend.
Who will not save a penny, shall never have many.
Children should hear, see, and say nothing.
Less is more 
We shall lie all alike in our graves.
Seek till you find, and you'll lose no labour.
Think much, speak little, and write less.
Fools build houses, and wise men buy them.
Sorrow is good for nothing but sin.
He who marries for wealth sells his liberty.
A house divided against itself cannot stand
Marriage halves our griefs, and doubles our joys.
Keep me from still water; from that which is rough I
They that cannot do as they will, must do as they can.
Into every life a little rain must fall
Jam tomorrow and jam yesterday, but never jam today 
It is an ill horse will not carry his own provender.
August dry and warm, Harvest doth no harm.
He that runs fast will not run long.
All are not thieves that dogs bark at.
It's a bad sack will abide no clouting.
He liveth long that liveth well.
A Saturday's moon Always comes too soon.
Thunder in December foretells fine weather.
Meat is much, but manners is more.
He that travels far knows much.
Scald not your lips in another man's pottage.
Prate is but prate; It is money buys land.
March winds and April showers Bring forth May flowers.
As good as gold.
Hide nothing from thy minister, physician, and lawyer.
An Englishman's house is his castle.
He that chastiseth one, amendeth many.
An Englishman's home is his castle 
If God had meant us to fly he'd have given us wings
He that handles thorns shall prick his fingers.
A young man idle, an old man needy.
Faint heart never won a fair lady.
Those who live in glass houses should not throw
Be careful what you wish for
An oak is not felled by one blow.
Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned 
Time is money
Handsome is as handsome does
Valour that parleys is near yielding.
Stupid is as stupid does
Don't cut your nose off to spite your face.
Don't cut off your nose to spite your face
Behind every great man there's a great woman 
As poor as Job.
He that bites on every weed must needs light on poison.
As patient as Job.
God send me a friend that may tell me my faults; if not, an
Take away my good name, and take away my life.
As clear as mud.
Impudence is not courage.
Much is expected where much is given.
He that sows nothing plants thistles.
Englishman's home is his castle
When you ride a young colt see your saddle be well girt.
He that reckons without his host must reckon again.
Fiddler's fare; meat, drink, and money.
He that will steal an egg will steal an ox.
Judge not, that ye be not judged
He loseth nothing who keeps God for his friend.
As thick as thieves 
He that goes softly goes surely.
He can ill pipe that wants his upper lip.
Truth hath a good face, but bad clothes.
He who is not handsome at twenty, nor strong at thirty,
Absence cools moderate passions, and inflames violent ones.
Don't wash your dirty linen in public
No man is an island 
Keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee.
He that sends mouths sends meat.
When sorrow is asleep, wake it not.
As like as two peas.
Home is home, be it ever so homely.
He had need rise betimes that would please everybody.
He measures your corn by his bushel.
They who don't intend to pay, Will promise payment any day.
As you make your bed so you must lie on it.
Agree, for law is costly.
Chain is only as strong as its weakest link
Might is right
Gold goes in at any gate, except Heaven's.
All you need is love
Law is an ass
He that will thrive must rise at five. He that hath thriven may lie till seven.
They that are bound must obey.
Company in distress, Makes trouble less.
Every cock is proud on his own dunghill.
When I have thatched his house he would throw me down.
Frugality is an estate.
Till St. James's day be come and gone, You may have hops, or you may have none.
He that despiseth small things shall fall by little
"Hardly ever" saves many a lie.
He that hath no money needeth no purse.
Enough is enough 
Words are for women, actions for men.
There are none so blind as those, that will not see
You must ask your neighbour if you shall live in peace.
Take time when time is, for time will away.
Life is sweet.
Her face was her fortune.
He that pays last never pays twice.
Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me 
Where music is no harm can be.
Yule is good on Yule even.
He who hath no ill fortune, is dazed with good.
He that's down, down with him.
He that buys land buys many stones.
He who seeketh trouble never misseth it.
Apples, eggs, and nuts, One may eat after sluts.
He that buys flesh buys many bones.
He that buys eggs buys many shells.
If you want a thing done, go; if not, send.
Knowledge is power.
He that would catch fish must not mind getting wet.
You can't take it with you [when you die]
Happy is he who hath sown his wild oats betimes.
If you wish a thing done, go; if not, send.
When thy neighbour's house is on fire, be
He that goeth out with often loss, At last comes home by Weeping Cross.
Genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains 
All are not friends that speak us fair.
Hell is paved with good intentions.
If you build it they will come
Where bees are there is honey.
Love is blind.
He that buys ale buys nothing else.
Saving is getting.
Talk is cheap
Better three hours too soon than a minute too late.
As good twenty as nineteen.
Words are but sands, It is money buys lands.
One may think that dares not speak.
Seeing is believing.
Silence is golden 
Revenge is sweet.
Silence is consent.
Live for today for tomorrow never comes
He that goes a-borrowing, goes a-sorrowing
Ignorance is bliss
Mocking is catching.
Scorning is catching.
Malice is mindful.
He that grasps at too much, holds fast nothing.
Forewarned is forearmed.
Love is no lack.
Truth may be blamed, but it can't be shamed.
He that hath no head, needs no hat.
Those who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones
People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones
Wise men care not for what they cannot have.
Search others for their virtues, thyself for their
Store is no sore.
Exchange is no robbery.
Beauty is no inheritance.
Beauty is but skin deep.
Forbearance is no acquittance.
He who would enjoy his friend's dinner should not look into
He lies like an epitaph.
There is no rule without an exception.
Catch that catch may.
Hear all, see all, say nowt, tak' all, keep all, gie nowt, and if tha ever does owt for nowt do it for thysen
Horses for courses
Long looked for comes at last.
It is no use throwing good money after bad.
He who can does, he who cannot, teaches 
We must do as we may, if we cannot do as we would.
After Lammas corn ripens as much by night as by day.
Whether you boil snow or pound it, you will have but
Who weds ere he be wise shall die ere he thrive.
Every man as his business lies.
Who hath spice enough may season his meat as he pleaseth.
After dinner sit awhile, after supper walk a mile.
Laws were made for rogues.
No accounting for tastes
All publicity is good publicity 
Milk which will not be made into butter must be made into
Vice is nourished by being concealed.
What is worse than ill-luck?
Tomorrow is another day 
Never rains but it pours
Give neither advice nor salt until you are asked for it.
Pay as you go.
It is pity fair weather should do any harm.
If it ain't broke, don't fix it 
For what thou canst do thyself rely not on another.
Use is second nature.
Customer is always right
When you are at Rome, do as Rome does.
There are none so deaf as those who will not hear.
He that knows himself best, esteems himself least.
If there were no receivers there would be no thieves.
Speak as you find
No news is good news.
Will without reason is blind.
An ill wind that blows no one any good
Old age is honourable.
You catch more flies with honey than with vinegar
Almost was never hanged.
Neighbour-quart is good quart.
There would be no great ones if there were no little.
You can catch more flies with honey than with vinegar 
You are what you eat 
As you make your bed, so you must lie upon it
If you can't be good, be careful
Let them laugh that win.
Custom is second nature.
Virtue is its own reward
Hard upon hard makes a bad stone wall; But soft upon soft makes none at all.
When good cheer is lacking our friends will be packing.
He teacheth ill who teacheth all.
Lovers live on love, as larks on leeks.
War is death's feast.
Hindsight is always twenty-twenty
Be ruled by your purse.
Bought wit is best.
What your glass tells you will not be told by counsel.
Nothing is surer than death.
If you lie down with dogs, you will get up with fleas
That which does not kill us makes us stronger
Keeping from falling is better than helping up.
Blood is thicker than water 
All's well that ends well.
Health is better than wealth.
I had not cut my wise teeth.
Least said is soonest mended.
Fair exchange is no robbery 
Prevention is better than cure.
An unbidden guest must bring his own stool with him.
Self praise is no recommendation.
Forbidden fruit is sweet.
Faint praise is disparagement.
It's an ill wind that blows no one any good 
Blushing is virtue's colour.
Truth is stranger than fiction.
Those who sleep with dogs will rise with fleas
Beauty is only skin deep 
None so blind as those who will not see
As you sow so shall you reap 
If every one would mend one, all would be mended.
Lose nothing for asking.
Though good be good yet better carries it.
Beggars must not be choosers.
You cannot see wood for trees.
What cannot be cured must be endured.
Pen is mightier than sword
Woman's work is never done
What can't be cured must be endured
Beggars should not be choosers 
If we do not hear reason she will one day make herself be
One eye-witness is better than ten hearsays.
Too far east is west.
They love too much who die for love.
Know which side your bread is buttered 
There's no accounting for tastes
None so deaf as those who will not hear
Well begun is half done.
Waste not want not
Every one's faults are not written on their foreheads.
If one will not, another will.
Many are called but few are chosen 
It goes without saying
He may well be contented who needs neither borrow nor
One story is good until another's told.
Wise men are not caught by wiles.
Forecast is better than work hard.
Better poor with honour than rich with shame.
Every man has his price 
Every man has his humour.
Every man has his hobby-horse.
Count not your chickens before they be hatched.
When all is consumed repentance comes too late.
There's none so blind as those who will not see
Plenty as blackberries.
Everybody's business is nobody's business.
Doing nothing is doing ill.
Zeal without knowledge is frenzy.
One volunteer is worth ten pressed men
Hot love is soon cold.
Make not your sail too large for your ship.
One man's meat is another man's poison 
You may pay too dear for your whistle.
Mouth civility costs little but is worth less.
As you brew, so shall you bake.
An army marches on its stomach
Agues come on horseback, but go away on foot.
If you trust before you try, You may repent it ere you die.
He who laughs last laughs longest 
Boys will be boys.
Every dog has his day.
There's none so deaf as those who will not hear
If anything can go wrong, it will
We can't all be top sawyers.
Medlars are never good till they be rotten.
One hand will not clasp.
They love dancing well that dance among thorns.
Burn not your candle at both ends at once.
Don't run away with more than you can carry.
Once well done is twice done.
Many speak much that cannot speak well.
Pleasing ware is half sold.
It's an ill wind that blows nobody good.
Never quit certainty for hope.
Eaten bread is soon forgotten.
Wit bought is twice taught.
You should never touch your eye but with your elbow.
Different strokes for different folks 
Dry bread at home is better than roast beef abroad.
Give credit where credit is due
Every Jack has his Jill.
Jest not at another's infirmities.
Success has many fathers, while failure is an orphan
By stratagem, not valour.
Appearances can be deceptive
Barefooted men should not tread on thorns.
Count not your chickens before they are hatched.
Desires are nourished by delays.
Two heads are better than one.
Pain is forgotten where gain follows.
Frugality makes an easy chair for old age.
There are more threatened than struck.
No such thing as bad publicity
Waste not, want not.
Volunteer is worth twenty pressed men
One hour's sleep before midnight is worth two hours after.
Law makers should not be law breakers.
Spend not where you may save; spare not where you must
Now or never.
Fight fire with fire 
Those are wise who learn caution from their own
As easy kiss my hand.
When old age is evil, youth can learn no good.
Rich men's spots are covered with money.
An occasion lost cannot be redeemed.
Wood half burnt is easily kindled.
Man does not live by bread alone 
Deeds are fruits, words are but leaves.
Words are but wind, But blows unkind.
Wounds may heal, but not those made by ill words.
He goes a-sorrowing, who goes a-borrowing.
Zeal without knowledge is fire without light.
Devil looks after his own
Courtesy on one side never lasts long.
Army marches on its stomach
Quick at meat, quick at work.
Wolves lose their teeth, but not their memory.
One barber shaves not so close but another finds work.
Fault-finders should be fault-menders.
Every man hath his faults.
Confine your tongue, lest it confine you.
Old praise dies, unless you feed it.
Better be envied than pitied.
"Care not," would have.
Stars are not seen during sunshine.
You reap what you sow 
There's no such thing as bad publicity 
Gentility without ability is worse than plain beggary.
By wisdom peace, by peace plenty.
You can't win them all
Woman's instinct is often truer than man's reasoning.
Idleness must thank itself if it goes barefoot.
Don't mix business with pleasure
Eat at pleasure, Drink by measure.
Knowledge, like physic, is more plague than profit, if
Women must have their wills while they live,
Youth will have its swing.
Genius is one percent inspiration, ninety-nine percent perspiration 
Let bygones be bygones 
Rain from east, Two days at least.
There's nowt so queer as folk
Where coin's not common, commons must be scant.
Call me cousin; but cozen me not.
One never loseth by doing good turns.
It's not how long, but how well, we live.
What every one asks, what every one gives, but what very few
You can choose your friends but you can't choose your family
Three may keep counsel, if two be away.
Love thy neighbour as thyself 
Wit may be bought too dear.
Far from court, far from care.
Wise men learn by others' harms, fools by their own.
When children stand quiet they have done some harm.
Let your purse be your master.
No living man All things can.
You win some, you lose some
Better be idle than ill employed.
Every tub must stand on its own bottom.
Life begins at forty 
Fortune knocks once at least at every man's gate.
Courts have no almanacks.
Better are small fish than an empty dish.
Make love not war
Shrouds have no pockets
Raise no more spirits than you can conjure down.
One God, no more; but friends good store.
Yorkshire fashion--every man pay his share.
Money doesn't grow on trees
High places have their precipices.
Charity begins at home.
Most take all.
When knaves fall out, true men come by their goods.
Wink at small faults.
No one can make you feel inferior without your consent
Save me from my friends.
Thoughts are free.
God reacheth us good things with our own hands.
Slow but sure
Pry not into other people's affairs.
Have but few friends, though many acquaintances.
No sunshine but hath some shadow.
Don't count your chickens before they are hatched 
Let every tub stand on its own bottom.
STEPHEN. Blessed be St. Stephen; There's no fast upon his even.
Rub your sore eye with your elbow.
Time tries all.
Lips however rosy must be fed.
Wide will wear but narrow will tear.
Caesar's wife must be above suspicion
No fool like an old fool
Few words are best.
High winds blow on high hills.
An old dog will learn no tricks.
Where hearts are true Few words will do.
Truth will out 
Better be half hanged than ill wed.
Delays are dangerous.
Don't put all your eggs into one basket.
Pardon all men, but never thyself.
Murder will out.
Comparisons are odious.
Let every pedlar carry his own pack.
Poor workman always blames his tools
Kissing goes by favour.
If you pay peanuts, you get monkeys
You can't teach an old dog new tricks 
Practice what you preach
Flattery will get you nowhere
Old men are twice children.
Second thoughts are best.
Never sigh but send.
God never measures men by inches.
Time will tell
Children are certain cares, but very uncertain comforts.
Willows are weak, yet they bend other wood.
Try your friend before you trust him.
None ever yet got fat on windfalls.
Grasp all, lose all.
Walls have ears.
Grasp no more than thy hand will hold.
There's no fool like an old fool 
Foul hands befoul all they touch.
There's no great banquet but some fare ill.
Never put off until tomorrow what you can do today
Cowards are always cruel.
Even small birds must have meat.
One may sooner fall than rise.
When two ride together one must ride behind.
Muddles at home make husbands roam.
You can't make an omelette without breaking eggs
Sweet meat must have some sauce.
Years know more than books.
Pocket an injury.
No man can serve two masters.
When one door shuts another opens.
Cast not pearls before swine.
Roses, mind you, have thorns.
Look before you leap.
One flower makes no garland.
What God will, no frost can kill.
Thou shalt not kill 
Little pitchers have long ears.
Love thy neighbour, but pull not down thy hedge.
If wishes were horses, beggars would ride.
Every dog has its day 
What goes up must come down
If wishes were butter-cakes, beggars would bite.
One lie makes many.
No place like home
One fool makes many.
Self do, self have.
Stolen kisses are sweet.
All things must pass 
Opportunity never knocks twice at any man's door
I'll keep no more cats than will catch mice.
What one man despises, another craves.
Creditors have better memories than debtors.
People are sometimes better contented full than fasting.
Little bodies have large souls.
Great spenders are bad lenders.
Great marks are soonest hit.
Haste over nothing but catching fleas.
Little pitchers have big ears 
Every light has its shadow.
If wishes would bide, beggars would ride.
Better one eye than quite blind.
Great oaks from little acorns grow 
Gold alone makes not prosperity.
One good turn deserves another.
Liars have short wings.
If wishes were thrushes, beggars would eat birds.
Every bean has its black.
More afraid than hurt.
One sheep follows another.
Children are poor men's riches.
Every shoe fits not every foot.
Short cuts are sometimes longest.
Words are like weights, gravity gives them effect.
Every cross has its inscription.
Short reckonings are soon cleared.
Too much liberty spoils all.
Every tide has its ebb.
Let not thy right hand know what thy left hand doeth.
Keep some till more come.
Evening orts are good morning fodder.
Never carry two faces under one hat.
Dogs bark before they bite.
Poor folk have few kindred.
Painted pictures are dead speakers.
Cry you mercy, who killed my cat?
If life deals you lemons, make lemonade
If you cannot bite, never show your teeth.
There's no place like home
Think twice before you speak once.
Like master like man.
First things first
Winter finds out what summer lays up.
Everything would live.
Do what thou ought, let come what may.
An old sack wanteth much patching.
Sorrow will pay no debt.
Muffled cats are bad mousers.
Kindnesses, like grain, increase by sowing.
Mighty oaks from little acorns grow 
Cowards may die many times before their death
Gray hairs are death's blossoms.
Every stick has two ends
No pain, no gain
Measure twice before you cut once.
Bachelors grin, but married men laugh till their hearts
No sweat, no sweet.
No names, no pack-drill 
No cross, no crown.
No cut like unkindness.
Good words cool more than cold water.
No pains, no profit.
Desperate cuts must have desperate cures.
No mill, no meal.
No sport, no pie.
Example teaches more than precept.
Don't burn your bridges behind you
One ill word asketh another.
Hope humbles more than despair.
Straight trees have crooked roots.
You can't make bricks without straw
No alchemy like saving.
Ships fear fire more than water.
It's ill healing an old sore.
There's one born every minute 
New lords new laws.
Every bird must hatch her own egg.
Adversity flattereth no man.
Hasty climbers have sudden falls.
When God wills, all winds bring rain.
Haste trips up its own heels.
Valour can do little without discretion.
Sometimes words Wound more than swords.
If you can't beat em, join em
See no evil, hear no evil, speak no evil
Child's pig, but father's bacon.
Don't put new wine into old bottles
Any fool can bet.
An ill stake standeth longest.
Ready money will away.
Keep your chin up 
Little minds, like weak liquors, are soon soured.
Better late than never.
Discreet women have neither eyes nor ears.
You can't make omelettes without breaking eggs.
Jests, like sweetmeats, are often sour sauce.
No longer pipe, no longer dance.
Wonders will never cease
Nothing dries up sooner than tears.
No smoke without fire
Gold dust blinds all eyes.
Like father like son.
Laws catch flies, but let hornets go free.
Honey catches more flies than vinegar 
First come, first served.
Some rain, some rest.
Worrying never did anyone any good
No use crying over spilt milk
God helps those who help themselves
One year's seeding makes seven years weeding
Young men may die, old men must.
Dead men tell no tales
No flying without wings.
Golden key can open any door
No joy without annoy.
Bad money drives out good
No gains without pains.
Love me little, love me long.
Don't cry out before you're hurt.
November take flail, Let ships no more sail.
When ill luck falls asleep, let nobody wake her.
Envy never enriched any man.
Kindness will always conquer.
Care's no cure.
It's no use crying over spilt milk
Who never climbed, never fell.
Time flies
Many hands make light work.
Good wine needs no bush.
Old foxes need no tutors.
Hard work never did anyone any harm
Old soldiers never die, they simply fade away. 
Rising tide lifts all boats
Covet nothing over much.
Necessity knows no law.
Faith will move mountains 
There's no smoke without fire
Sweep before your own door.
Beans should blow before May doth go.
Death keeps no calendar.
Hunger will break through stone walls.
Like father, like son
Who sings drives away care.
There's no joy without alloy.
Where honour ceaseth, there knowledge decreaseth.
More haste worse speed.
Like author, like book.
Pride feels no pain.
Prettiness makes no pottage.
Better safe than sorry
More haste, less speed 
Don't get mad, get even
Talking pays no toll.
March grass never did good.
Third time lucky 
Better wise than wealthy.
Beauty buys no beef.
Fair faces need no paint.
Forego, forget, forgive, Then happy you shall live.
Better untaught than ill-taught.
Who depends upon another man's table often dines late.
Love me, love my dog.
Fine words butter no parsnips 
Nothing like leather.
Never too late
Bad penny always turns up
Over boots, over shoes.
Fair words butter no parsnips.
Soft words butter no parsnips.
Old young, old long.
Much coin much care.
Good servants make good masters.
Good fences make good neighbours 
Time cures sorrow.
It's never too late
Don't throw good money after bad 
Leopard cannot change its spots
When wine sinks, words swim.
Least said, soonest mended
Peril proves who dearly loves.
Good counsel never comes too late.
There's never enough where nothing's left.
Actions speak louder than words
Birchen twigs break no ribs.
Beat swords into ploughshares 
Keep your tongue within your teeth.
Speculation completes what extravagance began.
Rolling stone gathers no moss
Let well alone.
Business before pleasure
Nothing succeeds like success.
Win first, lose last.
Little things please little minds.
Don't cast your pearls before swine 
Another day, another dollar
New broom sweeps clean
Every little helps
Don't trust anyone over thirty
Light suppers make long lives.
After cheese comes nothing.
Little mother, little daughter.
Short reckonings make long friends.
Much meat, much maladies.
Never say die.
Put your best foot forward 
Good die young
Little goods, little care.
Age before honesty.
Manners maketh man
Rain before seven, fine before eleven
Much bran, little meal.
Many kinsfolk, few friends.
While there's life there's hope.
Many without punishment, none without sin.
Extremes seldom last long.
Over haste makes certain waste.
March many weathers.
Good wares make quick markets.
House divided against itself cannot stand
Hearts may agree though heads differ.
Borrowed garments never fit well.
Hunger costs little; daintiness much.
What soberness conceals, drunkenness reveals.
Take away fuel, take away flame.
Ask thy purse what thou shouldst buy.
Who hath aching teeth, hath ill tenants.
Little strokes fell great oaks.
Hard cases make bad law 
Hasty men never lack woe.
Good harvests make men prodigal, bad ones provident.
Wranglers never want words.
Bread always falls buttered side down 
Keep your powder dry 
After clouds comes clear weather.
Man proposes, God disposes.
April showers bring forth May flowers
Easy come, easy go
Prosperity gains friends, adversity tries them.
Great braggers, little doers.
Under water famine, under snow bread.
Count your blessings
Hidden troubles disquiet most.
After rain comes fair weather.
Manners often make fortunes.
Great minds think alike 
Make haste slowly
Still waters run deep.
Small rain lays great dust.
Tomorrow never comes
Small things affect light minds.
Good take heed doth surely speed.
Big fish eat little fish
To-morrow comes never.
Great boast, small roast.
To-day me, to-morrow thee.
Covetousness brings nothing home.
Fine feathers make fine birds.
Goes without saying
Craft bringeth nothing home.
Where there's muck there's brass 
Angry men seldom want woe.
Happy go lucky.
Good watch prevents misfortune.
Nothing venture nothing win.
Money makes money.
Cheats never prosper
Poverty parteth good fellowship.
Misfortunes seldom come alone.
Hasty resolutions seldom speed well.
Long absent, soon forgotten.
Watched pot never boils
Fair feathers make fair fowls.
Faint heart never won fair lady
Barking dog never bites
Crooked logs make straight fires.
Sure bind, sure find.
Evil communications corrupt good manners.
Water bewitched.
History repeats itself
Wrinkled purses make wrinkled faces.
Nothing ventured, nothing gained
Merry meet, merry part, merry meet again.
Money isn't everything
White silver draws black lines.
Don't meet troubles half-way
Ever drunk, ever dry.
Rich country, bad road.
Early sow, early mow.
Shoemaker's son always goes barefoot
Wool sellers know wool buyers.
Custom makes anything easy.
Cold hands, warm heart
Soon hot, soon cold.
Soft answer turneth away wrath
Never cry "Stinking fish."
Let sleeping dogs lie
East, west, home's best
Drunken folk often speak truth.
Ill got, ill spent.
Trade knows neither friends nor kindred.
Once bitten, twice shy
There's honour among thieves
Honour among thieves
Money talks
Fast bind, fast find.
Power corrupts; absolute power corrupts absolutely 
Seldom seen, soon forgotten.
Wilful waste makes woeful want.
Green Christmas, white Easter.
Opportunity lingers sometimes.
Hunger makes short devotion.
Reckless youth makes rueful age.
Slow fire makes sweet malt.
Practice makes perfect.
Misery loves company
Absolute power corrupts absolutely 
Poverty parts friends.
Crime doesn't pay 
Hunger makes hard bones sweet beans.
Bad news travels fast 
Hope springs eternal
Haste makes waste 
Jesting lies bring serious sorrows.
Bought wit makes folk wise.
Ill news comes apace.
Neither praise nor dispraise thyself, thine actions serve
Extremes meet.
Adversity makes strange bedfellows 
He's Tom Tell-troth.
Adversity tries friends.
Evil gotten, evil spent.
Harm watch, harm catch.
Fancy passes beauty.
Standing pools gather filth.
Prettiness dies quickly.
Silence seldom doth harm.
Gather thistles, expect prickles.
Woe follows wickedness.
Ill weeds grow apace.
Ill gotten gains seldom prosper.
Punctuality begets confidence.
Unknown, unmissed.
Hungry flies bite sore.
Softly, softly, catchee monkey
Timely blossom timely ripe.
Familiarity breeds contempt.
Poverty breeds strife.
Quid pro quo 
Opposites attract
Oppression causeth rebellion.
Physician heal thyself.
Physician, heal thyself 
Thinkers govern toilers.
Labour warms, sloth harms.
Finders keepers, losers weepers
Unminded, unmoaned.

